1. Lack of voter turnout. / 2. Lack of support by influential leaders in my community. / 3. Lack of support by my local party.A crowded primary. Minimal party support. Low local volunteer support.a famous political family name was running against me.A new comer who's got support to make change is a totally different race than an incumbent who is now seen as the 'establishment.'  It's a very different campaign the second time around. It's hard to compare to legislators however, because Democrat legislators in Arizona are always fighting against the establishment, or by Republicans, just simply ignored. As a school board member who did win a struggle to turn an elected body, and is now considered the status quo...it's a whole different ball game.  AgeismAs a sole proprietor for my own optometric office my practice suffered to the brink of closure due to the expense of hiring other doctors to replace me and having less oversight of day to day management while I was campaigningAs an older Latina, I was practically invisible to the political establishment. No political consultants took me seriously, so I could not hire anyone. This may have worked to my advantage as I saved a bundle and did all my own campaign work (designed a website, developed and printed campaign literature, coordinated my own fundraising, scheduling and messaging) I was quite thankful to have a great treasurer. / Backlash against dems in a republican year. Also the struggle of running as a young woman! Balance of home life etcBalancing family, full time job and campaigning. It's hard! Also the emotional roller coaster campaigning brings. Balancing the demands of being a mom, working, and running the campaign.Balancing the needs of my family with the amount of hours spent on the campaign and overcoming not being a "local" candidateBalancing time with my family, missing out on a lot of the kids activities.  Winning has only meant more work, but no financial assistance. School boards are unpaid.  This is ok, in my personal situation bc of my husband's income, but it is a serious barrier for many. Balancing work, campaigning, and family. Because I was running in a red district, it was difficult to raise money and find a campaign manager. Being discriminated against by members of the Democratic Party of my county and state.Being taken seriously as a contender by progressive/Dem political class in my community. They viewed the race as unwinnable and also wrote me off as young/inexperienced.Being targeted by Right to LifeBiased local newspaper coverage, which was nastily personal and favored the conservative "good ole boy" network in my area. It was hard to break through that influence to get people to know me personally.Biggest challenge: no experienced campaign managers or staff. I had to import mine. He cost me 3,500 a month. Biggest challenges included raising enough money to fund my budget, and managing the incredible amount of time & energy it takes to run (and also have a job / family).Both races were in Republican areas. I was running as a Democrat. Campaign issues...  /  / Fundraising! I hate asking for money!  /  / At a personal level... /  / I'm very comfortable in my own skin, look very professional, have been told I am a "pretty" girl,  and have very thick skin.  Nevertheless, I have been surprised at how much negative feedback I receive on my appearance.  I've been told my hair looks like, "I've had a roll in the hay" (It's long and blonde), "I wear too much makeup", "not enough makeup", my JCrew shorts "are too short" (they were just above my knee), and my "heels are too high" (They were the normal heel).   I've been told by dirty old men that I just need to stand next to the polling booth and that my looks will win me the race.  I've had dirty male union workers make harassing comments.  I've had women say I was too pretty to win.  I've been told not to talk about my law degree because it's too intimidating.  Of course, you can't say anything because you'll loose votes and be labeled argumentative, but the sexism is exhausting.  It's the equivalent of reading your own version of, "Jimmy Kimball's Mean Tweets".  I rarely get asked public policy questions, but I get a ton on my single marital status (I have standards and can't find someone who meets them) and why I don't have children (I have a medical condition, but is that really anyone's business?).  I've been told that I should consider loosing 20 pounds and have had a onslaught on digs.  Thankfully, I'm of the believe that you should never let anyone dull your sparkle.  ;-) Nevertheless, as a single woman, it's hard to hear the comments and not take it personally.  You need an inner circle that allows you to come home and take the armor off.  When you are single, you don't have that.  I was told that if I ran, the inner circle would come, that my support team/inner circle would appear.  To be honest...they really haven't.  It is a lonely path and it's fine, but I think Emerge should consider having a real conversation about how challenging it can be as a single woman.  Moreover, the economic impact of being single in a race is tough! This is a very real financial sacrifice.  I would run again, but likely only when I'm married or have a partner I can rely on. Campaigning while being employed full-time at considerable distance from my townCaring for family and maintaining a full-time job.Central committee is a crapshoot; the vast majority of the electorate has no idea what it is, and if they do make it all the way down ballot they typically will vote for the first 6 (or however many seats are open) names on the list.  It's less a race than it is praying to be high up in the random alpha drawing so you get good ballot placement!Constant comments about my age (28)Crowded field of candidates. Politically charged town. Fundraising as someone who didn't come from wealth or an affluent network.Currently running for office right now and am shocked by the level of hostility and lies thrown against me by my own Democratic brothers and sisters and even some Emerge alumnae who actually recruited another Emerge alumna to run against me.Currently running for state house: time management- I am currently mayor, business owner and candidate! Never enough time - challenge to balance and maintain personal health as well as get everything done!Dark money that came in for TV ads, full page newspaper ads and radio with false allegations of corruption!Dealing with strong feelings of othersdifferentiating myself from the many other candidatesDirty politics and not having enough moneyDishonest and unsupportive leadership within the state and city democratic party and from elected officials who wanted to maintain the status quo.Distinguishing myself from others who either pretended to be progressive or whose values were diametrically opposed to mine and not representative of the electorate.Early on few people thought I should run. I was worried (needlessly it turned out) about raising enough early money.entrenched political family known to campaign unethically who also has ties to many big donors.ExhaustionFamily balance.Fear of loss of privacyFierce competitor.Finances.Financial supportFinding the time for all the work. Finding the time to knock doors and raise money while working full-time.Finding time to adequately campaign while working full time to support myself. Finding time to campaign in addition to my other responsibilities (work, family, ect.)Former and current elected officials running.FundraisingFundraisingFundraisingFundraisingFundraisingFundraisingfundraisingFundraisingFundraisingFundraising Fundraising Fundraising Fundraising Fundraising and time management Fundraising for an office no one cares aboutfundraising insecurities / not enough volunteers fundraising, campaign organizing (lack of volunteer staff)fundraising.Fundraising.Fundraising.  I would not seek contributions from the law firms and attorneys who appear before the District Court, which significantly limited my options.Fundraising. By far, the biggest challenge was fundraising. Add to all of the normal uncomfortableness of asking friends and family for money to support you campaign the fact that I am a trans-woman with a deep-for-a-woman voice, and my struggles with dailing-for-dollars was that much more challenging.Getting complacent folks to vote getting out the vote / registering people to voteGetting over my fear of feeling exposed to criticism if I made a mistakeGetting support (both in general and financially)Getting the community engaged.Getting volunteers thought my professional group would help moreGetting voters to understand the complexities of the issuesGoing against "the good ole boy system". And the back room votes & deals made by our own party at every levelHaving people take me seriously. Finding help running my campaign. Lots of people encouraged me to run but vanished when I needed volunteers.Having sufficient staff to address campaign needs, sufficient volunteers to assist with door knockingHaving to quit my job to run for office. I was commuting almost an hour each way at a full-time job. I quit my job almost 4 months before the election to dedicate my full-time to the campaign. It took me exactly a year to the date that I quit to find a full time job. I did not win my election. Narrowly lost by 69 votes.Holding two part-time jobs with a wife working full time and a teen with medical challenges made it very difficult to knock on doors.I am a Democrat in a minority majority district with a 17% Democratic issue, so I did not face a challenge in my race.  However, my challenge was voter turnout for the rest of the Democratic team.I am currently running for office for the first time.  My biggest challenge is designing a campaign plan to make sure I target the right persuadable voters with the right kinds of communication.  I am currently running for the New Mexico legislature and my biggest challenge has been me living in a paradigm of being a community organizer working to make real systemic change and working in an environment heavily lead by politics, that--in most cases, is about winning races for party and not for ideals. I am single and really wanted a partner for emotional supportI am single. To win I would have to quit my job or work half time. I cannot afford to do that I am something of an introvert and therefore campaigning by door knocking, which is how it is done here, is a constant challenge for me.  Also, I live in a swing district and must do a lot of convincing unenrolled voters to support me.I am speaking now (and in the previous question) about my current campaign If you are asking about my run for school board, that was 15 years ago, and I can't remember any downside. There was no competition, so I won reelection easily.   My biggest challenge in my current race for state assembly is having to do so much on my own, and recruiting good helpers for my team.  I do h (ave a kitchen cabinet, but few of them have political experience, extra time or a strong commitment. They offer advice at meetings, but few want to do much to help otherwise.  I have had some help at a few local parades.  I need to recruit help, and make calls for funding. THEN I can work for the votes! I am unable raise money because I'm a Gov't employee.I am well known in my community and am very identified with the local Democratic party.  The biggest challenge I face is that many people I meet and talk with during the course of a campaign listen closer to what they expect me to say rather than what I actually say.I barely did anything to run for the Board of Selectman because I knew nothing back then. But the biggest barriers to me running now are the tremendous amount of time it takes to run - balanced against spending time with my kids, my relationships, and my need to earn an income - and concerns about privacy and discrimination because I'm polyamorous.I didn't have to actually campaign or race money for my central committee race. In future races, my biggest challenge will be raising money as I hate asking people for money. I got pregnant during the campaign! Physically that was a challenge but also I was concerned about the attitude voters would have about a soon to be new mom as a candidate.I hate fundraising - such a waste of time.I have always had male opponents---sometimes 4 sometimes only 1.  I am not a native of this town although I've lived here 30 years and raised 4 children here.  That is a liability because I'm not a "townie." My opponents always have been.  I say lack of a "y" chromosome, penis and large family living here have been my main liability.I have not run for public officeI haven't had a challenger in 14 years, so my campaigns are simple.  I use my time helping others to run.I mounted a strong campaign as soon as I was appointed; I ran uncontested!I ran against a very well-funded incumbent in my second race, but my biggest challenge was that labor lined up with him even though he hasn't been a consistent ally. Even women's groups didn't do all they could, including some of my Emerge sisters. We need to stand together more.I ran against an incumbent.  My biggest challenge was his use of public resources to bolster his campaign, his ties to a local machine that allowed him to manipulate major endorsements, including the democratic party, and his negative whisper campaign and mailings.  I ran against someone who people knew very well and had money.I ran against the candidate chosen by the Governor to run. There were tremendous challenges about this uphill battle versus the establishment. It is extremely difficult to convince establishment leaders to take anyone other than their chosen candidate for the primary. I ran against two  people that had been in politics for 40 years each, and I had never been in politics. They had a lot of special interest money and name recognition _ô»‰I ran in a very red district (Virginia's 7th district)  / it is now turning purple with transplantsI ran unopposed and was concerned about voters acknowledging the office that I ran for as being significant for serious attention; thereby, ignoring me, my skills and other contributions that I would bring to the office and to my constituents.I ran unopposed in my third and most recent race.I think was the fundraising. The first time I ran I did it on a budget and alot of help from my friends. I raised about $3000.00. I bought my yard signs buttons,did several robo calls. I did use social media but not as much as I wanted. I am hoping to sign up for at least act - blue. I could have used a good field director.I have worked on campaigns before so that helped a lot. I have a lot of super voters in my district along with the elderly population. I also have a multi languages spoken in my district. I had a friend who helped me last time and has agreed to help me again to have my message in different languages. The money I have raised so far is some what better. I may make it to $ 5000.00 i do have a treasurer and a senior management people who are helping and guiding me. I met with an individual early this year to see if we can work on getting union support. We selected about 5 to 6 unions to target. I am single,no dependents or children so I am free to do what I need to do. Also just to let you know I am not shy about asking for money trust and believe.i just deposited  $150.00 and making phone calls several times a week. I am working on trying to get endorsements from present and former politicians. That part is a little difficult. I am ok for now. I am saving my vacation time so I can knock  on doors for 6 weeks. 50 doors a day. I have my work cut out for me. I am also trying to get volunteers also. I do so enjoy meeting the voters face to face. I do have a small base which I can call my own and it feels Damn Good  !!I was not prepared to run for state senate at the time. I did it in the wrong order, did not get the training for such a campaign beforehand, and my husband was very much against me running.I was running against an incumbent and I did not have a lot of support in getting my information out. Plus people thought the coroner was a doctor when in reality it is just a figure head who only had a high school education I work full-time. Elective office in Maine doesn't pay a salary. I needed to support myself and my family, do I campaigned at night and weekends.if I had won I may well have lost my job, I'd worked as a social worker for 30 years where I kept to the background because the work is focused on the client, not on me.  And as a social worker, I'd kept a low profile regarding family, political opinions, address (issues of transference best served by not being "about me" in the relationship with clients).  Identifying the voter base and reaching those voters across the stateI'll be honest, running for "elections official" in my district of the city was not terribly difficult. I did have to knock on doors and get enough signatures to appear on the ballot, but once I had done that, there were as many candidates as there were spots, so we all got elected.  /  / However, I had been contemplating a run for a legislative seat when I heard that the incumbent was not running again. However, I backed down when my neighbor, also a Democrat and a woman, and with the advantage of 10 years of legislative experience, was announced as the person chosen to run for the open seat. I felt she would serve our district well and it wouldn't do any good to run against her. I'm an introvert. Being public -- asking for money, attending fundraisers, being the center of attention -- is hard!In 2010 I ran for Oregon House District 37.  I did not win in the primary because party leadership had promised the seat to another man who lived outside the district, had never held office of any kind, and had zero connections there.  He moved into the district, and was able to fundraise effectively because donors were told not to donate to me because he was the chosen one.  He ended up losing in the general to a first time ever female GOP candidate who has been difficult for both parties to work with.  Party leadership has since apologized for their failure to seek a candidate from the district, and for their failure to support me.  In the first race I won 45% of the vote against the incumbent. I spent $1000 only and I didn't have a candidate's statement in the guide. The second time all boxes referenced before would have been  checked. Also the Superintendent at that time had chosen "her" replacement. My EMERGE training was very valuable however the election was not national and the timing was off for me in utilizing my E training. I also was less public than I should have been...as in connecting with my broad and varied networks...daughter leaving for college and complex unresolved family matters because of divorce.income while runningIncumbent advantage Inside politics--Dem on Dem. / Involvement of outside influence.  My most recent council race felt more like a state-level race, which was much more difficult than my first race.Issues of mild physical disability making it difficult to "do doors"It is my first race so I am not sure I have faced my biggest challenge. But so far it is my self confidence.It was a local municipal race and the biggest challenge was getting the slate to work together with all the various personalities and time constraints.  Upper Darby Township is the state's 6th largest municipality, so there is a lot of territory to cover.It was my second time running and there was a group who was very unhappy about a financial decision that I made during my term. Ultimately it didn't affect my re-election.Juggling family commitments, a full time job, serving as an appointed Council Member, while finding the time to be an effective campaigner. Every minute of my day is calculated and accounted for. Just FYI, to the previous question, I would add "Fear of being discriminated against because of religious beliefs."  I am an atheist, and although I am not blatant about it, some people know and I fear that if I decide to run again or run for higher office that will be an impediment. /  / The incumbent I was running against in the School Board race decided not to run again, so my campaign was uncontested.Lack of fundraising.Lack of name recognitionLack of party and Emerge sister support. Lack of political support and campaign managers in rural areaLack of support from the state Democratic party, who said because I could not win my district, they would not help. They just wanted me to run so my supporters would come out to vote up ballot.Learning the work.  Losing income both during campaign and while serving (legislative pay is about $24000 per year) Losing necessary income while campaigning, and taking a pay cut when I need to money to pay bills.  Also, how to run a campaign as a single woman - both in how I'm perceived, as well as just taking care of the day to day logistics of life (like bills, oil changes, etc.).Losing!Lost my job during the last week of the primaries and trying to find the finances to put gas in my car to walk precincts maintaining a work-life balance. It is no coincidence that my marriage fell apart exactly one year after my election.  My ex-husband gave lip service to supporting my aspirations, but in the end had no ability to really support my efforts to effect change in the city of Piedmont. It is a great pity.  That doesn't change how proud I am that I ran and won.  But it says volumes about my marriage that it couldn't withstand this very important goal.  making connections in the "old boy" networkMaking the decision to run was my biggest challenge, especially since I ran unopposed.Managing time away from my family. Campaigning 24/7. Also being outspent 2-1.Many people wanted to stay out of the race because my opponent was an older organizer who has built relationships over the years. That didn't necessarily mean they believed he would be a good leader. They felt it would be safer to be neutral. Misinformation spread by my opponent Misinformation that was spread about me that contributed to my loss. Also, having to deal with getting to know a new community after redistricting. I had held my seat in the House for 2 terms before the redistricting.MoneyMoneyMoney. Lots of it on the other side, mostly provided by the Koch brothers and their organizations. My age and the fact I had no children in the schools.  I also was not from an active family in town so it was getting my name out and showing then that this 26 year old really cared in 2012My April 2016 race ended up being unchallenged.  The incumbent resigned in January.My biggest challenge came from racism, being a woman, a minority and the xenophobia of the constituancy. My biggest challenge was definitely balancing family and the campaign, as a working mommy of four kids, this was a struggle before the campaign and was further exacerbated when I ran for office.  My spouse also found this a challenge and he often voiced his concern about me "taking on too much and not spending enough time with the family." My biggest challenge was getting the word out about my candidacy -- the challenge was about campaign tactics given limited time and money. I had lived in my community for only three years and I needed to establish myself with long-time residents.My last race was for Mayor of the City of Radcliff,  The biggest challenge for me was that the Democratic Party did not support me,  that was why I attended Emerge to be better prepared and ready with the party help or not. I planned to run for State Representative and the House divided that State, I was not prepared due to not knowing anyone in the cities I needed to succeed. I am working on it at this time. My most recent race was for Village Trustee.  I ran for an open seat.My only race (8 years ago) was fairly straightforward.  The biggest challenge was probably getting the word out so I would have name recognition.My only race so far has been for school board (important, but not exactly high-stakes statewide campaign). The biggest challenge was getting out there and meeting my neighbors/making myself visible, as I'm a relative newcomer to a small town where many people have been born and raised here.  My private life fell apart. The jerk I was married to decided that it was time to call our marriage quits just as the campaign was ramping up in late summer. I could not continue to actively campaign as I had to land on my feet by obtaining full-time employment. He never mentioned this when I discussed my consideration of running, nor did he wait until after the election. Typical! So, I remained on the ballot, but actively withdrew from the race, allowing the House Caucus to continue to campaign on my behalf so that we didn't hand to the seat to my opponent.My race was non-partisan, so not a great example.  It was very small and I won the most votes.  However, I was also in a very political position--in the paper constantly--so my name was well-known and liked.My race was uncontested and the biggest challenge was staying motivated in a Wisconsin winter to get out and knock doors each dayMy town has never - not since 1910 - elected a democrat. My work became very demanding at the same time I was running for re-election. I was unopposed in the primary so I was able to get by without a full blown campaign. I would have had to take a leave of absence from work if I had had a competitive race. N/AN/A for committeewoman race - I was 18 at the timeName recognition, being taken seriously as a young candidate. Negative campaign approach by 2 sets of opponents (one from the right and one from the left); mean-spiritedness, easy willingness to engage in falsehoodsNegative campaign from termed out legislator (I was running against his hand-picked successor).Negative campaigning against meNegative information from non-supportersNegative pressNegativityNo support from my party and having the labor unions supporting another candidate.nonenone. I ran unopposed. None. I ran unopposed. Not being taken seriously.  Fundraising.  Work/life balance and strain on family.Not being the establishment's candidate.  Time spent dispelling misinformation spread by the establishment.Not currently runnj g. Contemplating two different racesNot enough money to pay for a professional campaign manager and expensesNot enough volunteers Not having a specific agenda. In a local race, most people who run have a thorn in their side, and that's why they run. People get behind them because they run on one issue (lower taxes, or better roads). I really believed I was smart enough to learn the big picture quickly enough that I could think more broadly about the intersection of the issues and how to solve the larger problems - like what drives taxes, or planning for road repair. Also, I am a liberal, and it was hard to accept that some people just wouldn't like me or vote for me due to that label, even though our races were not party affiliated. Not having an experienced campaign manager to run an effective grassroots campaign!Not having the support of some fellow democrats who had supported me in the past. Devastating!Not knowing what exactly to do.  Didn't have the time to invest in it like I should havenot taking me seriously because I'm a short, plain-dressed, no make-up, woman.  what you see is what you get.  /  / not that I'm actually worried about this, but if there was a challenge, this would be itNot understanding how to create a strategic campaign across my school district.Not working to run for office and giving up my income. Nothing specificNumerous candidates Out spent and door knocked by my opponent.overcoming name ID Pleasing everyone who was helping me run. Mentors were pretty demanding about how I conducted my campaign. Preterm labor: I delivered my daughter six weeks early, two weeks before my primary. / Proving that age and experience did not surpass knowledge and intentRacial discrimination is common practice in this heavily social and politically oppressed conservative area of our state. Although I'm an active Democrat and leader in our area, at times I experience discrimination and racially different treatment not only from conservative Republicans, but also from fellow Democrats who say they are christian progressives.raising $Raising adequate funds to support running a successful campaign. Raising enough money. Also I got started late so didn't have enough name recognition.raising fundsRaising moneyRaising moneyRaising moneyRaising moneyRaising money and lies told by my opponentRaising money and negotiating the political structures in place.Raising money as a first time candidate, gaining the endorsements from unionsRaising money to get your message out.  Raising money was very challenging. Especially getting men to contribute was difficult. Over 50% came from women and only 35% from men. The other 15% was from organizations.Raising money, getting the word out about what this office is, and I was also severley Gay-bashed on-line and was the target of hateful rumors, internet posts and tweetsRaising money, volunteers and holding down a very full time job and serving on the board. Raising money.Raising money.Raising money. Being able to take off work to have the time to run for office without loosing my jobReaching voters and educating them about my qualifications.  My county has a population of over 2 million and covers a large geographic area.  Raising money for my race was difficult.Reaching voters and generating interest in the downballot position for which I ran.Recognition. I was not well-known in my community. Right now - time. Family, work and current elected office duties don't leave much time to run again. Last time - being heard as a serious person. I knew a lot of people in town, but had never run before.Running against 2 Tea Party incumbents in a conservative district. I was worried about being a single woman with no kids and being attacked for it, but that didn't happen.The biggest challenge was going from being an unknown to getting known -- I made a dent but I've been campaigning ever since and am an active Farm Bureau Board of Directors member as well as other organizations that allow people to know me first as an engaged community member rather than a Democrat (only 33% Dem in my district).Running against a nice guy in a complacent off off year election Running against an incumbent who had a background in education. But he was 80 years old and wasn't doing the job, so he had no support of anyone current in education.Running against an incumbent. Running as a d in a slightly more republican district against an incumbentRunning as a Green, I expected the party to support my race. It didn't and I lost a winnable race. And I was running against a four term millionairerunning as a progressive in a majority Republican district.School board- I decided to run at the last minute.  I didn't really have enough time to campaign and was an unknown in my town.SexismSexual orientation whisper campaign by opponent. Since it's a small race and I raised a moderate amount of money I had to do a lot on my own and raising money, getting key endorsements was tough.Social mediaSome very right-wing nay-sayers.Standing out, being myself among a field of candidatesStaying organized and balancing the time to campaign with work and family. stigmaTaking time off from work The antics of the Republican party aka dirty politics....that may have been my biggest fear also.  Overcoming my background in church ministry...lol.  I wasn't take as seriously as I should have been.The biggest challenge during my most recent race was dealing fellow Supervisors who had encouraged one of my opponents (I had a primary) to run against me.  We had verbally pledged to support one another.  These same Supervisors helped my opponent create campaign literature that listed misleading information about me including distorting votes I'd made that they had as well.   Though I won my reelection by a wide margin, it still disappoints me greatly that people who say they're on your team would actively work against you.  The biggest challenge for me in this race is that it is exclusively partisan and therefore exclusive. I look forward to future opportunities to represent members of my community across party lines.The biggest challenge for me was securing others to help with phone banking, etc. Most of my friends are mothers as well so every contact that was made by the voter was done by me and me alone. The biggest challenge for my race was the lack of support from the state Democratic Party.  Big donors will not contribute to your campaign if you are not on a list sent out by the state party.  Despite the possibility of winning your seat the state party parse resources according to their algorithm and unfortunately they support non-winners, hence the reason the House of Delegates only has 32 out of 100 that are Democrats.  The state has a losing game plan and refuses to change their methods to flip the House. Everyone knows it is a losing plan yet we all have to live with it.The biggest challenge in my race was my gender. I ran for office when I was 21/22 (had a red solo cup birthday fundraiser!). The seat that I ran for and won is comprised of students - undergrads and grads. The information level for the campus county board seat and campus city council seat was very low, the district's population moves every year (dorms/student housing), and the people who wrote about the race/county were the male writers and editors at the student newspapers - and they rarely covered anything.  /  / I say the biggest challenge was my gender because of the interactions I had while campaigning and while speaking to reporters. It was like, "wait, a girl is running for the seat?" and "why does a girl in college want to be on the county board" - questions my male opponent didn't get. The interactions in the endorsement meetings were so awkward. One of the student papers, headed by a woman, endorsed (me). The other, headed by a man, stayed out and made some unqualified and unprepared comment. Absolutely ridiculous.  /  / The biggest challenge was being heard in alarge primary fieldThe biggest challenge was finding time to be a candidate (campaigning, meetings, fundraising, etc.) and working a regular job to pay the bills. The biggest challenge was getting to know elected officials and community leaders throughout the district. The district includes parts of eight cities in two counties, and I was not known through most of the areas. I spent the first half of my campaign just meeting with people, and asking those people who to meet with next. This ended up being tremendously helpful to getting elected, and also very helpful to serving as an elected. The day I took office I already had built relationships throughout the district, and I believe this has made me more effective.The biggest challenge was not knowing the strategy I needed to use ti campaign. I was a less familiar candidate running against two incumbents and a successful local businessman.The biggest challenge was overcoming those skeptical about my age and the appropriateness of running for school board without being a parent. The biggest challenge was raising enough money to run a county wide race for school board.  Most people don't research school board candidates, so you need to connect with many community leaders, elected officials, parents, etc.,The biggest challenge was running in a PR system, where your second race is typically the most difficult.  Many voters gravitate to first time candidates.  I received excellent advice from a long time City Councillor on strategy. A secondary challenge was my child had significant mental health challenges throughout my campaign.  I was dogged at raising funds and setting up house parties.  There were many more candidates running in my second race than the first.  I came out in the same place as I did in the first race (4th out of 6; the 1st, 2nd, and 3rd were long term incumbents, who also landed in the same place as the previous race).  Another first time committee member lost (she was 7th.)  The biggest challenges running in my first race was time management. I was working a full time job out of financial necessity, raising two teenage children and ended up in a targeted swing district in 2010. It was really hard to balance my campaign and work responsibilities and my family life certainly suffered. We get paid $24k a year to be a state rep and as my husband hadn't found his current job where he makes more, we really struggled to make the economics work. The other issue was that because I was a good fit for a urban/rural swing district, it meant that I wasn't considered "progressive enough" for people in the local party who wanted me to campaign to the left of my district. I didn't listen to them and won and with our majority, we passed incredibly progressive legislation. I have found that activists on the left can sometimes be the biggest obstacle to winning swing seats because they let the great be the enemy of the good. The biggest problem is that I have to raise so much money.  I'm working really hard on field and donations, and my opponent is doing little to nothing because he will have outside money pouring in when he needs it.  It's insulting.The city is very conservative and it was very partisan (especially with the Presidential primary).  The Republican party put a lot of time and money into his campaign.The dirty underbelly of politics. The emotional toll of campaigning The endorsement process was grueling. I sought the local Labor Council's endorsement and felt like I was discriminated against for being a young Asian American woman. I was interviewed on the same panel as one of my colleagues in a different district who happened to be an older Asian American male. While we had very similar responses, I felt like I was being bullied the entire time. The fact that I had lost twice before for two different offices. The fund raising part of it as well as splitting votes with other democrats.  I also ran against another Emerge Kentucky AlumThe geographic size of my district made it difficult to do as many doors as I would have liked. The greatest challenge was finding my base of voters. It was really positive experience, until I lost.The guy who ran the village was against me from the beginning. Overcoming his biasness eas difficult. The inherent challenge of running for the first timeThe largest challenge I faced when I ran for the Magistrate (2002) was the lack of knowledge and understanding to do to run my race. I just placed my name on the ballot and went door to door to talk to people. I lost the race by 30 votes.   The most significant challenge I faced was an assumption by others going into the race that my male opponent was somehow more qualified or more likely to win, despite similarities in our public service experience  and my clearly wider array of experience, particularly relating to the office for which we were running. Throughout the race, my opponent to use gender biased language, and his attacks on me where stereotype a cal throughout the race, my opponent to use gender biased language, and his attacks on me were typical of those seen when women run for office. The negativity from the colleagues and trust THE OLD BOYS CLUB! Also, lots of republicans in fitchburg in my ward. Regardless, I will run again for city council. I love my town & I know I can do a better job than the current "Old boys club" councilor who holds the seat.  The political climate in San Francisco and the control the "progressives" had over the DCCC and slate cards and being labeled a "conservative" because I am considered a moderate Democrat in SF based on the elected officials that I have worked for. The registered voter numbers in our House District, which were higher for Republicans leading to the fact that there had never been a Democratic representative for our District.The time it took to raise money, network with people for endorsements, identify and manage volunteers, and make contact with voters.The vicious nature of local politics took me aback-- I was subject to personal attacks from the union that I did not anticipate. This year we had a wealth of well qualified candidates.TimeTimeTime - Being able to talk to as many voters and donors as possible to win.time away from familyTime constraints and limited resources Time for fundraising given the demands of attending voter outreach events Countywide time managementTime management - letting go tasks and letting others work for me.  I can't afford to pay much if anything and my tendency is to try to do it all. Can win if I'm doing routine tasks.  Need to focus more on voter contact and fundraising.Time management.  Doing a campaign right takes TONS of time.  There is always more work than time.  With a busy job and long commute the days could be exhausting and LONG.Time management.  Learning the people and processes that are key to winning in my community.  Fundraising. Time management. The district was very large in area. There were so many events to attend, neighborhoods to walk door to door, and evening meetings to attend. Time management: working a full-time job as a music teacher, running a very intense campaign with lots of field, and trying to stay balanced- I'm still not sure how I did it!Time management; also had a full time job and other commitments. I'm Time to go door to door and do all the necessary logistical work; volunteer manager, spouse and son and friends as well as union/school colleagues and local Dems are helping/Time to knock doorstime to manage my campaign Time, fundraising needs, and Tea Party opposition.Time, fundraising, and health.  I became ill during my last campaign. Time, time, time! It is difficult to be the primary parent on duty and an elected official.Time.  I kept working full-time while I was running, as I rely on the income.  It was a huge challenge to find the hours in the day to get everything done.  I definitely let relationships and self-care slip during this time.  Somehow it all came out okay. Too hard to run for office in San FranciscoTravelling to people's homes and introducing myself.  I tend to be introverted and it was definitely out-of-the-box for me to do that.Trusting myself through the process. I approach my fundraising as if every donation was the only one I would get. I outraged my competitors but still didn't realize my power to do the work. Trying to raise money.  There was no help from the state party.Trying to stay motivated to keep knocking doors and making phone calls. I had a baby in the middle of my campaign. I took him when he was just a few weeks old to start knocking on doors. It's not easy to care for a new baby, breast feed and knock on doors to talk to voters all at the same time and in 90 degree weather. Trying to talk to everyone in my District. / Understanding my competitors and overcoming their strategy.Unsolicited advice from EVERYONE under the guise of being helpful.Very competitive.Voter engagement, GOTV so  Iget more votes.Voters who said they would support me, then changed their minds. It felt like betrayal.When running for State Senate in 2014 my biggest concern was the money in politics, outside spending and negative campaign advertisement. I also found it difficult to be able to maintain a strong grassroots component for my campaign, making sure I could have a presence throughout the Senate District I was running in. It is hard to make and maintain contact with rural voters and it is hard to run in a district that is historically a Republican District.While it was difficult to hold a full time job, be a mother, and serve on city council, I ultimately found it impossible to add to that a successful 2nd re-election campaign and lost by 200 +/ votes to candidates that were wealthy enough to pursue the office full-time.Woman who got into the race as a spoiler. Working full-time and not having the money to take unpaid leave and the concern of being away from my job that long.Work-life balancework-life balance, and time management. There just are not enough hours in the day (says the woman completing this survey at 5:25 am).Work-life balance.Would i do a better job.  WOuld i be effective in making positive changes.You missed a big issue on the previous question.  That of being outside the "inner circle of leadership" to me this is a critical issue and one that Emerge should talk more about.  How women can become players in the city even more critical if a strong inner clique is running the city.  The need to grow into your community when you can't get appointed to a board or commission or if you have no children and haven't served on a school board.   /  / And for the answer below, it should say running for re-election, for me, I've been in office for 5 months so I think I will run again in 3 years but so much can happen, and for me, the outsider, it could be a very difficult 4 years.  Although for now I am on the 3/2 side of most issues, i.e., on the winning side.