"To the Editor: ""Winds in Mauritania Kill 4,"" a brief June 2 news item describing a violent storm in Mauritania that killed three women in Nouakchott, the capital of the West African country, and a child in Boutilinit, and injured 300 people, is obviously cause for concern and sadness. However, these tragic deaths at the hands of nature are entirely overshadowed by far more extreme violence on the part of the Government of Mauritania. Most recently, human rights groups have begun to receive details of the deaths of at least 200 prisoners. The ruling Arab-Berber Government, as a part of its continuing violence against black Mauritanians, arrested somewhere between 1,000 and 3,000 black Mauritanians during the last months of 1990 and the beginning of 1991, and held them in incommunicado detention. When this huge group of detainees began to be released last April, details emerged of the deaths of at least 200 prisoners, most of them as a result of severe torture or extrajudicial execution. This latest outrage by the Mauritanian Government is only one example -- though a horrifying one -- of the broader range of inhuman violence that has been visited upon black Mauritanians by their own Government. Between 1989 and 1990, the Government forcibly expelled from the country into neighboring Senegal and Mali as many as 80,000 black Mauritanians, mostly members of the Halpulaar, Wolof, Soninke and Bambara ethnic groups. Among a large litany of abuses, the Government has burned and destroyed entire villages, and forcibly confiscated livestock, land and belongings of black Mauritanians in an effort to encourage their flight out of the country. In addition, allegations of the practice of that most horrendous of human rights abuses, slavery, persist, despite its having been officially banned in 1980. Recently, a Mauritanian friend of mine told me that he does not know any black Mauritanian who has not had a friend or a relative killed, thrown into prison or expelled from the country. Perhaps in this time of famine and war in East Africa and continuing tragedy in the Middle East, Mauritania has simply slipped the mind of the Western world. What, however, would the reaction of the international community be if over a period of three months 200 South Africans, Chinese or Kuwaitis had been tortured to death? BEN PENGLASE Associate, Africa Watch Washington, June 7, 1991"
