"Leaders of the Rwandan Government agree that an international tribunal to prosecute former leaders for genocide should have the authority to impose the death penalty, but they are divided over whether to reject a tribunal, under consideration by the United Nations, that lacks such power, Government officials say. In a debate within the Cabinet, the Prime Minister and the Justice Minister say the Government should accept a tribunal even without this power. Gen. Paul Kagame, who commanded the victorious rebel army and who is now Vice President and Defense Minister, insists the death penalty is necessary. The Government has been lobbying the United Nations to establish a war-crimes tribunal since mid-July, after the Rwandan Patriotic Front took power. The Government, which has become increasingly irritated by what it views as the slow pace of United Nations decision making, had asked for a tribunal to try officials of the former Government who planned and carried out the massacres of tens of thousands of Tutsi, as well as moderate Hutu. A Security Council resolution to establish a tribunal, introduced last week by France, New Zealand, Great Britain and the United States, disappointed the Government. On Monday, the Council postponed a vote for a week to consider Rwanda's concerns. The Government wants to have the tribunal sit in Rwanda, or in other African cities -- rather than The Hague -- and to include Rwandan judges. The Government also wants to be sure that the tribunal does not deprive it of the right to try perpetrators of the massacres in Rwandan courts, where the death penalty can be imposed. General Kagame, widely regarded as the most powerful person in the Government, and other Rwandan officials argue that the widespread slaughter in Rwanda was so heinous a crime that the death penalty is the only appropriate response. Government officials also worry that if a tribunal cannot impose the death penalty, organizers of the massacres -- the potential defendants before the tribunal -- would get lighter sentences than those who pulled the trigger or wielded the machete, who would be tried in Rwandan courts and could be executed. Rwanda's concern about the death penalty presents a problem for the Security Council because it is virtually impossible to adopt a resolution with a death penalty provision. Since 1968, the United Nations has called on states to abolish the death penalty, and the states that have signed a protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights agree not to execute anyone. The United States has not signed the protocol, which was adopted in 1989, nor has Rwanda. But a peace agreement signed in Arusha, Tanzania, in August 1993 -- between the former Rwandan Government and the Rwandan Patriotic Front -- called for the Government to sign all international human rights conventions. The Patriotic Front has said that it will abide by the spirit and most of the provisions of the Arusha accords, and advocates of accepting an international tribunal that does not have a death penalty provision said today that they will use the accords in their campaign to persuade General Kagame to accept that position. Prime Minister Twagiramungu said he felt strongly that the death penalty should be imposed. But, he said, if the death penalty was not included, that should not prevent the tribunal from being established. ""We have asked for an international tribunal, and we must stick to our commitment,"" he said. One Cabinet minister who insisted on anonimity said it would suit him fine if the Security Council set up a tribunal in spite of Rwanda's objections."
