"Speaking to his party faithful in South Africa last week, President P. W. Botha flaunted this quotation from Abraham Lincoln: ''There is a physical difference between the white and black races . . . I am in favor of the race to which I belong having the superior position . . . I am not, nor have I ever been, in favor of making voters or jurors of Negroes, nor of qualifying them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people.'' Mr. Botha's point was that Lincoln was reflecting the spirit of his time, and yet Americans do not now refer to him in a derogatory manner. So why ''are Americans acting in this way against us?'' Perhaps the best response is from Lincoln. Here is what he went on to say during the same debates in 1858 with Stephen Douglas, from which Mr. Botha drew: ''Notwithstanding all this, there is no reason in the world why the Negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence - the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. I hold he is as much entitled to these as the white man.'' Inadvertently, one assumes, Mr. Botha has touched on the crux of the debates that made Lincoln a national figure. The issue was whether slavery was an evil that ought to be contained, or whether (as Douglas held) its existence and spread might be tolerated under the doctrine of ''popular sovereignty.'' In countering Douglas, Lincoln could have been addressing Mr. Botha's argument that South Africa has a sovereign right to its own peculiar institutions: ''Now what is Judge Douglas' popular sovereignty? It is, as a principle, no other than that, if one man chooses to make a slave of another man, neither that other man nor anybody else has a right to object. (Cheers and laughter.) Applied in government, as he seeks to apply it, it is this: ''If, in a new territory into which a few people are beginning to enter for the purpose of making their homes, they choose either to exclude slavery from their limits, or to establish it there . . . there is no power or right to interfere. That is Douglas' popular sovereignty applied. He has a good deal of trouble with his popular sovereignty. His explanations explanatory of explanations explained are interminable. (Laughter).'' True, Lincoln himself got into a good deal of trouble by condemning slavery while denying he favored equal rights for Negroes - hence the remarks that Mr. Botha seizes on with such glee. In doing so, Lincoln sank to the bigotry of a white electorate. But he soared above it by repeatedly affirming the universal values that made white supremacy morally indefensible: ''I adhere to the Declaration of Independence. If Judge Douglas and his friends are not willing to stand by it, let them come up and amend it. Let them make it read that all men are created equal except Negroes. . . . ''In his construction of the Declaration last year, he said it only meant Americans in America were equal to Englishmen in England. Then, when I pointed out that by this rule he excludes the Germans, the Irish, the Portuguese and all the other people who have come among us . . . he reconstructs his constructions. In his last speech, he tells us it meant Europeans. I press him a little further, and ask if he meant to include the Russians in Asia . . . He is not at all particular. He is satisfied with anything which does not endanger the nationalization of slavery. It may draw white men down, but it must not lift Negroes up.'' It was Douglas, not Lincoln, who rationalized one race's subjugation of another, nurturing seeds of secession and civil war. And yet Mr. Botha wonders why Americans are unpersuaded by his own explanations explanatory of explanations explained, interminably."
