"The South African police, who are confronting their own transition as the country abandons apartheid, have received some blunt advice from New York City's top policeman. ""An American lesson for policing post-apartheid South Africa might be: 'Get on with it,' "" said Commissioner Lee P. Brown. ""Don't waste the next century attempting to devise ways to frustrate the aspirations of a subjugated people."" In the Natal city of Pietermaritzburg last week, Mr. Brown addressed a conference held on ""Policing the New South Africa."" His audience included senior officers from the South African police and the police in the Zulu homeland of KwaZulu. Other speakers offered views of the African National Congress and Pan-Africanist Congress, against whom the police waged war for 30 years, and the rival Inkatha Freedom Party, with whom the police have been accused of colluding. ""I think it was very well received,"" Commissioner Brown said in a telephone interview after his speech on Wednesday. Fewer Than 43% Are White He said he understood that police headquarters in Pretoria received daily reports from the three-day conference, whose sponsors included the Center for Criminal Justice at Harvard University and the Ford Foundation. Commissioner Brown said his brief stay in South Africa did not give him time to visit police stations here. But he had an opportunity to tour black townships around Pietermaritzburg, where the police have been called on to suppress factional fighting. The South African Police, who traditionally enforced apartheid, now must serve even old enemies like the African National Congress. The police often come under physical attack in black townships, where they are widely distrusted, and have been accused by critics of abetting the violence. Fewer than 43 percent of South African police officers are white. But their superiors are usually white Afrikaners and include sympathizers with the right-wing Conservative Party and even the white supremacist Afrikaner Resistance Movement. The New York City Police Commissioner's speech attracted interest here because he discussed the lessons learned by the police in the American South during the civil rights era. Commissioner Brown, a policeman for more than 30 years, ran the police departments in Atlanta and Houston before Mayor David N. Dinkins brought him to New York City. The commissioner talked about parallels between apartheid and the racism that pervaded the American South long after slavery was abolished. ""Considering history, considering cultural acceptance of segregation, considering that most police departments were predominantly or exclusively white, it should come as little surprise that the police in the American South were willing, if not eager, to deny basic rights to blacks,"" he said. ""The police enforce the status quo, which is admirable only when the status quo protects the rights of individuals. When the status quo is corrupt by virtue of its repression of others, then the police become instruments of repression and are corrupted in the process."" Commissioner Brown credited the United States Government with changing the climate to one that demanded unbiased law enforcement. He proposed that the South African Government bind its policemen to a code of conduct like that recommended for law-enforcement officials by the United Nations General Assembly. ""If there is a lesson in the American civil-rights movement for South Africa,"" the commissioner told his audience, ""it is this: There must be a national will to right past wrongs, and the police must be brought into the process."" ""The police must believe in protecting the rights of individuals, black and white,"" he continued. ""They must swear an oath to it. They must make it part of their personal and professional ethic, regardless of who is in power, regardless of political affiliation, regardless of skin color."""
