"President Daniel arap Moi, apparently angered by mounting press reports abroad critical of Kenya's human rights record, has announced that the Government will re-examine the status of the more than 100 foreign reporters based in the country. President Moi made the announcement last week after returning from a tour of Finland, Italy and Rumania. He was originally scheduled to visit Norway and Sweden, important donors of development aid to Kenya, during his nine-day European tour. But he dropped the two countries from his itinerary after what he characterized as a campaign by both countries to discredit his one-party state. Shortly before President Moi was to visit the two countries, the Norwegian and Swedish press widely covered a report by Amnesty International, the independent human rights monitoring group, that accused the Government of torture, political detentions and unfair trials of dissidents. Local politicians and the Kenyan press in turn accused the Scandanavian press of conducting a smear campaign against this East African country. In a speech delivered last Thursday after he returned from Europe, Mr. Moi questioned why some of the foreign correspondents operating from Nairobi could not base themselves in other African capitals and said the Government would review their work permits. He said that the Government would deny a request by a group of Swedish and Norwegian journalists to visit Kenya, saying that the reporters had refused an earlier offer he had made to them to come here. Speech at Airport ''They cannot continue insulting us every day,'' President Moi said of foreign reporters in his speech at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport outside this capital city. He said Norwegian and Swedish newspapers had falsely reported, among other things, that Kenya had jailed 40,000 children. Mr. Moi's Government has been dogged by charges of human rights abuses over the last year and has consistently accused the foreign press of writing false stories about police torture and other violations. More foreign correspondents are believed to be based here than in any other country in sub-Saharan Africa, and the Kenyan Government has in the past taken a relatively lenient attitude toward them. Although local politicians, including the President, regularly criticize foreign reporters for their coverage of Kenya, they have not in the past carried out threats to restrict their activities. But earlier this year, the Government announced new and much more stringent rules for the accreditation of foreign journalists, including the requirement that they produce letters from their professional associations or labor unions and the embassies of their respective nationalities. U.S. Visit Cut Short Mr. Moi abruptly cut short a visit to the United States six months ago after the State Department issued a statement expressing concern about reports of police torture of political dissidents and opposition leaders. Blaine Harden, a reporter for The Washington Post whose articles on charges of torture by the Kenyan police coincided with President Moi's visit to Washington, was ordered out of the country earlier this year but the expulsion order was rescinded the same day. Amnesty International said in its report, issued two months ago, that the Kenyan Government appeared to be deliberately silencing and intimidating its political opponents. It said that some political prisoners had been tortured and detained indefinitely by administrative order without charge or trial and that other such prisoners had been secretly or illegally detained, tortured into making false confessions and jailed for years after unfair trials. The organization said that at least two political prisoners had died in custody. Most victims of human rights abuse had been arrested on suspicion of having links with a clandestine opposition group in this country, the human rights organization said, but many others appear to have done no more than criticize the way the Government ran the country. Response to Amnesty Report Responding to the charges at the time, the Government said in a statement that it was investigating two policemen suspected of torture and said that ''on some occasions'' its law-enforcement officers ''may have used excessive powers in arresting certain people.'' But it insisted that torture was against the laws of Kenya and accused the Western press of publishing what it called a wave of anti-Kenya propaganda. In his speech, President Moi criticized Norway and Sweden for granting asylum to Kenyan dissidents. ''I decided that I would not visit any country that does not respect ours,'' Mr. Moi said. ''Since when did you invite a visitor to your country and start calling him names?'' Today the front page of a Nairobi newspaper, The Standard, carried a letter from the charge d'affaires of the Swedish Embassy here that denied any role in a campaign against Kenya. ''From the Kenyan newspapers,'' the diplomat, Tom Engdahl, said in the letter, ''one gets the impression that there has been a continuous flow of highly critical and untruthful articles about Kenya in the Swedish press. This is far from the case. ''On the contrary, fairly little has been written on Kenya and the grossly erroneous facts that have been cited in the debate here have in no instance originated from Swedish sources. It is not my duty to defend the press, but it seems necessary to try to keep proportions right.''"
