"A report issued today by an American committee of lawyers asserts that over the last three years, Zimbabwe's Government has committed a wide range of human rights violations against its political opponents and other people in the south of the country. The report, issued by the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, charges that Prime Minister Robert Mugabe's Government has engaged in a systematic campaign of terror and repression against the minority Ndebele-speaking people of southern Zimbabwe. Many of the report's assertions, which include torture, murder, arbitrary arrest and indefinite detention, have been made in the past by Amnesty International. A spokesman for the Zimbabwe Government, Justin Nyoka, declined to respond to repeated telephone requests for comment on the charges. In the past, the Government has denounced similar contentions by Amnesty International. Mr. Mugabe has described the rights group as ''Amnesty Lies International.'' Since independence in 1980, the Ndebele have consistently supported Joshua Nkomo's Zimbabwe African People's Union in electoral contests against Mr. Mugabe's ruling party, the Zimbabwe African National Union. Since 1982, armed bands have swept through southern Zimbabwe robbing and killing. Mr. Mugabe has charged that these bands, dubbed ''dissidents,'' have been supported by Mr. Nkomo. In 1983, the report charges, at least 1,500 Ndebele-speaking people were killed by security forces dispatched to quell ''dissident'' activity. The report also charged that thousands more Ndebeles were beaten, that hundreds were detained without charges and that many women were raped by soldiers. By 1984, the report said, fewer people were being killed by the security forces but detentions and beatings continued unabated. In 1985, the report said, more than 100 leaders of Mr. Nkomo's party were abducted and many have not been heard from since. The report's authors, Michael Posner, the executive director of the lawyers committee; Elliot Schrage, a former Kennedy Fellow at the Harvard Law School, and William Berkeley, an American journalist, all spent time in Zimbabwe last year and this year investigating charges of human rights abuses. Last month, the lawyers' committee issued a report describing widespread brutality by the South African police and army against black children in that country. After independence, the Ndebeles, who predominate in the southwest provinces of Matebeleland and who supported Mr. Nkomo's rebels during the guerrilla war against the white Rhodesian Government, continued to express their backing for Mr. Nkomo and their distrust of Mr. Mugabe's largely northern Shona-speaking party. After independence many of Mr. Nkomo's former guerrillas found themselves unemployed. Most of the armed ''dissidents'' in Matebeleland are thought to come from the ranks of these former guerrillas. The Government's response to the activities of these armed men has, according to the lawyers committee, resulted in a campaign of terror in the south of Zimbabwe. ''It is the conclusion of this report that the Government's campaign to suppress armed dissidents in Matabeleland has resulted in grave and persistent abuses of human rights,'' the report's authors wrote, adding that ''the Ndebeles have been subjected to a campaign of harassment and repression that has been scarcely distinguishable from the counterinsurgency campaign waged by the old white regime.'' The Government has charged that the dissidents are supported by the South African Government and that the police and army are simply responding to threats to the nation's security. The 201-page report quoted from interviews with many people who said they had been tortured by members of the security forces. The report said many witnesses and people who said they were victims of torture were afraid to reveal their identities for fear of reprisals by the Government. The report notes that the country's former minority rulers, the whites, have not in general been harassed but rather have been welcomed."
