"Some of the leaders of the former Marxist Government of Ethiopia were brought to court today to face charges of genocide and crimes against humanity on the opening day of a long-awaited trial. Forty-six defendants were brought handcuffed to the courtroom from prison. Twenty of the original 73 defendants, including former President Mengistu Haile Mariam, are in exile or in hiding and are being tried in their absence. Seven others have died in prison or elsewhere, officials said. The 66 living defendants face the death penalty. Conservative estimates say 150,000 people were killed in the campaign of persecution that followed Mr. Mengistu's seizure of power from Emperor Haile Selassie in 1974. That figure does not count the estimated 100,000 who died in forced relocation programs or 1 million who died in ensuing famines. The charges seek to tie the defendants to the disappearance, torture and killing of 1,823 identified victims. Mr. Mengistu, who fled to Zimbabwe when rebels overthrew his Government in 1991, acknowledged Monday there were killings under his rule, but disputed estimates that 150,000 were murdered. ""To say the numbers are 100,000 or 150,000, this is absolute lies,"" said Mr. Mengistu, contacted by telephone at his villa near Harare, Zimbabwe's capital. ""In this kind of social revolution and fundamental change there was a contradiction and there was a clash that cannot be avoided,"" he said. He called his Government a popular revolt on behalf of peasants against aristocrats and landlords. In today's opening session, defendants were identified and each member of the trial's three-judge panel took turns reading the charges. It is expected to take two more days to complete the reading of the 209 charges. The defendants have denied any guilt and accused prosecutors of manufacturing evidence of mass killings. Prosecutors say that up to 3,000 military underlings and civilians could face charges linked to the systematic killing of Ethiopians during the Mengistu reign."
