"The State Department told Congress today that abuses of human rights in Uganda had become ''among the most grave in the world,'' but said the situation did not warrant cutting off United States military assistance. The department said the abuses included large-scale massacres and forced starvation of dissident ethnic groups. However, Elliott Abrams, the Assistant Secretary for Human Rights, resisted suggestions by some members of the House that a provision of law that prohibits military assistance to a country violating international standards of human rights be invoked against the East African nation. Mr. Abrams and other public and private witnesses appeared before a joint session of two subcommittees of the Foreign Affairs Committee, one devoted to human rights and one to African affairs. The assistant secretary said that one of the most important causes of a situation that had ''deteriorated alarmingly'' in recent months was a ''demoralized and underpaid, underfed'' and undisciplined Ugandan Army. More, not less, military training assistance would be useful, Mr. Abrams argued. Training Effort Suspended However, Uganda has already suspended the small American training effort there in protest against recent public statements and news stories in the United States charging persecution of ethnic groups in Uganda. In addition to Uganda, Mr. Abrams furnished a report on what he called deteriorating human rights standards in Ethopia, Somalia and the Sudan. He attributed much of the difficulty in the Sudan to a recent burst of Islamic religious fervor on the the part of President Gaafar al-Nimeiry, who has recently imposed a system of traditional Islamic law, which permits amputation of limbs after summary, non-appealable trials. Mr. Abrams said that since the imposition of a state of emergency in April the number of amputations in the Sudan now exceeded 50, including some performed on non-Moslem citizens. The closest focus of the hearing was on Uganda, which had been terrorized in the 1970's by the Amin Government. President Milton Obote, the leader Idi Amin overthrew, returned to office in 1980, but the enmity between him and major ethnic groups such as the Baganda have persisted. Estimates of Death Toll The State Department official said that there seemed to be a consensus among foreign and some local officials in Uganda that from 100,000 to 200,000 Ugandans had been killed or starved, most of them in the last few months. But he said it was not possible to document these statistics. Mr. Abrams tended, in answer to many questions, to absolve President Obote of direct blame for the killings and what may amount to blockading food shipments into several trouble areas. The problem, he suggested, is not that the present Government is too strong but that it is too weak to control its own army. Meanwhile, the Reagan Administration announced today the approval of $8.5 million to provide 19,000 tons of emergency food aid to Ethiopia to combat famine resulting from the worst drought Africa has faced this century. Jay F. Morris, acting administrator for the Agency for International Development, said that the food would not be given to the Marxist Government in Addis Ababa but would instead be distributed through private voluntary organizations, such as the Catholic Relief Service."
