"The African National Congress issued a blanket apology today for torture, executions and other abuses committed in its exile camps during the guerrilla war against apartheid, but said it would not punish past human rights violators or pay compensation to the victims. Responding to an independent report that detailed abuses and cited men who still hold positions in the organization, Nelson Mandela, the president of the congress, said it would be unfair to discipline those accused within the anti-apartheid movement when officials who committed atrocities in support of apartheid remain free. Instead, the congress called for creation of a national ""truth commission"" to examine human rights violations by all parties and to pay reparations with Government funds. ""It would not be correct for either the A.N.C. or any other body to punish only a section of those who have violated human rights,"" Mr. Mandela told reporters after a three-day meeting of the congress's governing National Executive Committee. Paying reparations to victims of torture and families of those killed, he added, was ""far beyond the resources which the African National Congress commands."" An American lawyer who served on panel that studied cruelty in congress camps expressed disappointment today that the congress had decided to relegate questions of punishment and compensation to a future commission. ""That wasn't how we felt the thing should be resolved,"" said Margaret Burnham, a Boston lawyer who teaches political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ""Our view was that collective responsibility is necessary, but if human rights are to be rigorously and uniformly enforced, individual responsibility is also required,"" she said in a telephone interview. In its report the commission, which was appointed by the congress and also included a black business leader from South Africa and a lawyer from Zimbabwe, recommended that all those who violated human rights should be disciplined under the congress's own internal code of conduct, and their superiors should be held indirectly responsible. Until that happened, the commission said, its work was ""only half done."" Arbitrary Punishment Cited The commission report, made public a week ago, found that from the late 1970's until 1991 suspected spies and dissidents were imprisoned for up to eight years without any hearing, beaten to extract confessions, and tortured during their confinement. The commission listed cases of prisoners executed by firing squads for taking part in mutinies, or beaten to death for infractions of military discipline, or dead of malaria and other conditions in detention. Many of the officials accused of brutality hold posts in the congress security department, including one man who is a member of Mr. Mandela's bodyguard detachment. Two senior congress officials were accused of indirect complicity in abuses for failing to help prisoners whose cases came to their attention. The issue of cruelty in the congress's anti-apartheid camps has sharply divided the leading anti-apartheid organization, with some members demanding that the organization punish offenders as a show of its moral fitness to run the country, while others say the abuses took place at a time of unbearable duress. Today Mr. Mandela strongly defended the latter view, saying abuses were committed ""in an attempt to protect the organization against violations of human rights which were committed by the other side."" ""The alleged abuses were committed in a state of siege,"" he said. ""They were not committed as part of a deliberate and systematic policy of suppressing human rights as would be the case, for example, with the National Party Government."" Pressed hard by reporters to explain if he was saying the end justified the means, Mr. Mandela snapped that those reading policy could ""draw your own conclusions."" The congress, he said, had gone far beyond the Government by owning up to its past."
