"''I can't stand bullies, and I don't like people being fobbed off with second-rate justice.'' - Molly Blackburn Last May, at one of the numerous funeral rallies blacks have staged during 15 months of unrest that have claimed more than a thousand lives in South Africa, a white activist named Molly Blackburn led a delegation of white people into a stadium jammed with thousands of blacks. ''When she appeared,'' Alan Cowell of The New York Times reported, ''blacks rose up to salute her with clenched fists - a rare tribute across the color lines in this divided land.'' This month, it was the other way around. On Dec. 28, as she was returning to her home in Port Elizabeth after investigating allegations of human rights violations in a black township on the Eastern Cape, Molly Blackburn, 55, was killed in an automobile accident. Her funeral, attended by 10,000 South African blacks, became one of the biggest anti-apartheid rallies yet held - an even rarer tribute to a woman who defied convention, the law, the power of the state and the opprobrium of many of her peers to oppose bullies and ''second-rate justice.'' But Molly Blackburn's work, notable and courageous as it was, symbolized something greater, something too easily lost sight of in all the reports from South Africa of injustice, repression, riots, violence and death. She embodied what Alan Cowell called ''the frail strand of hope'' that whites and blacks in that unhappy country may yet salvage a way of living together in peace. For Molly Blackburn was not alone among white South Africans in lending her strength, presence and sympathy to its millions of voteless and oppressed blacks. She was, for example, a member of Black Sash, a white women's anti-apartheid group; her political party, the Progressive Federals, is in official opposition to the ruling Afrikaner Nationalist Party, which devised and maintains apartheid. Numerous whites, including not a few Afrikaners, have risked a great deal to support black rights. The Rev. Allan Boesak, who spoke at Molly Blackburn's funeral, was recently jailed for his efforts; the Rev. Beyers Naude, once a member of the secret Broederbond through which Afrikaners wield enormous political power, was ''banned'' for five years for preaching that apartheid was ''un-Christian.'' Just recently, a delegation of white businessmen met leaders of the banned African National Congress to begin laying the groundwork for post-apartheid black-white relations. Other white political and business leaders have spoken and acted for change. As in their recognition of Molly Blackburn, South African blacks know that not all whites are their oppressors. Influential black leaders, like Bishop Desmond Tutu, still work for moderation of the kind that caused the vast throng of blacks at the funeral to eschew, in Molly Blackburn's honor, violence and disorder. ''We do not hate whites,'' a black woman remarked during the funeral rally. ''We only hate apartheid.'' That is the ground upon which South Africans of good will and fair mind, whatever their color, can stand together - opposition to an unfair system of ''second-rate justice'' and unequal opportunity, enforced by armed bullies and a ruthless government. Not enough whites, either English-speaking or Afrikaner, yet share that ground to make Molly Blackburn's goal anywhere near a reality. Many whites, owing to the restrictive information policy of the Government, hardly even realize the depth and passion of black resistance. South Africa's most palpable injustice, moreover, is its central dilemma - that its oppressed blacks are an overwhelming majority; combined with persons of mixed white and black ancestry and Asians, they are roughly 22 million to only about 5 million whites (English and Afrikaner). Those figures guarantee determined white resistance to one-man, one-vote solutions; but anything less than a system of effective equality will not for long satisfy legitimate black aspirations. So it is indeed a ''frail strand of hope'' that Molly Blackburn's life and work represents; but as Dr. Boesak said, ''She died still trying to mold out of the hatred and misery and suffering of our people something new, joyful, beautiful.'' And what she stood for lives on."
