"The family and friends of the condemned men trickled into the prison waiting room to spend a last hour with their loved ones. The brief encounter was the only comfort they took away, for at dawn the next morning the five men were hanged. Hangings have almost become a weekly routine at Pretoria Central Prison, where the rate of executions has been rising steadily in recent years. This trend contrasts with the mounting pressure against capital punishment in much of the world. Last year South Africa executed 164 people, more than any other country in the world, according to Amnesty International. This was 4 more prisoners than were executed in Iran and 32 more than in China, two countries that have previously headed Amnesty's list. In the same year 25 people were executed in the United States, which has a population more than six times that of South Africa. The five hangings last Thursday brought to 115 the number of people hanged in South Africa this year; 273 other people are on death row. Of the 115, 79 were black and 33 were of mixed race. Only 3 were white. In an unusual admission in the white-dominated Parliament, Justice Minister Kobie H. Coetsee said in September that 83 of those awaiting execution had been convicted of ''politically motivated'' crimes. These prisoners, regarded by anti-apartheid groups as political prisoners, were in many cases convicted of violent crimes like murder committed in politically charged circumstances during civil unrest. Among those sentenced to hang recently were a group of blacks known as the Sharpeville 6, who were convicted of murder for their role in the mob killing of a black councilman. Their case became the focus of an international campaign for clemency. Last week President P. W. Botha commuted their sentences, along with those of seven others facing execution, including four white policemen convicted of the murder of blacks. But some lawyers contend that the decision will only intensify the controversy surrounding hangings in South Africa. 'Every Reprieve a Victory' ''We regard every reprieve as a victory for the abolition cause,'' said Brian Currin, director of Lawyers for Human Rights, a group lobbying for the appointment of a commission of inquiry into the death penalty. ''However, what is frightening is the arbitrariness of the selection.'' He noted that since 1983 there had been 638 executions in South Africa, the overwhelming majority of them of blacks. ''Here it is like a little factory where they just process hangings,'' he said. Among the voices raised in opposition to the death penalty recently was that of Business Day, the country's most authoritative daily financial newspaper. ''Hanging is a barbarous act unbefitting a civilized society,'' it said in an editorial. ''Its brutality, finality and the possibility of executing an innocent person are the main reasons the death penalty has been abolished in many countries.'' Critics of capital punishment, many of them lawyers, have suggested such changes as giving the courts the discretion whether to impose the death penalty, even where no extenuating circumstances are found, and granting the automatic right of appeal for convictions that carry the death penalty. Mr. Currin conceded there was little hope of the Government abolishing the death penalty soon. ''One has to first establish a human rights ethic in South Africa before people will understand the arguments for issue like abolition,'' he said. A petition from 220 relatives and friends of condemned prisoners was recently sent to President Botha. It called on him to stop all hangings immediately. ''To make a person sit, day after day, night after night, waiting for the time when he will be led out of his cell to his death is cruel and barbaric,'' the petition read. ''To be a mother or father and watch your child going through this living hell is a torment more painful than anyone can imagine.''"
