"Uganda reportedly suspended a United States military aid program today and barred an American colonel from visiting the country in response to criticism by the Reagan Administration about human rights abuses. Administration officials, repeating charges first made over the weekend, said today that the Ugandan Army had killed thousands of civilians in the last year in an effort to combat rebels. The officials said estimates by some private relief agencies placed the number of deaths at more than 100,000. ''It's as bad a situation as we've seen anywhere in the world in recent years,'' a senior State Department official said. 'Stringent Criticism' by U.S. In a recently published interview, Elliot Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, called the situation in Uganda ''horrendous.'' According to reports from Uganda, an Information Ministry official said the military aid program had been temporarily suspended because of ''stringent criticism'' by United States Government officials. The action was described as prohibiting the return of Col. Hugh M. Baker, the United States military attache in neighboring Malawi, from visiting Uganda to help administer the program. The move means the suspension of a $100,000 program under which Ugandan Army officers were sent to the United States for training, according to sources in Nairobi, Kenya, who were quoted by The Associated Press. 'Modest Military Aid Program' State Department officials said they could not confirm the Ugandan action. ''We do not want to fuel this fire,'' a senior department official said. He added: ''We have only the most modest military aid program that consists right now of training two or three Ugandan officers in the United States, and we have been considering an in- country training program there to supplement what the British are doing. Our desire is to help professionalize their military and help them get a handle on their problems, which are tremendous.'' State Department officials said Mr. Abrams would give Congress a full account of the developments in Uganda on Thursday, when he is scheduled to testify before two subcommittees of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. Senator Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, said today that during a visit to Uganda last month, he was told by private relief officials that the Ugandan Army had cut off food aid to more than 140,000 recipients. Mr. Grassley said he was also told about incidents in Ugandan hospitals in which soldiers forcibly removed patients and killed them. ''The military is clearly out of control,'' Mr. Grassley said. Situation Under Amin Recalled Administration officials likened the problems in Uganda to the human rights abuses that took place under the Government of President Idi Amin in the 1970's, when humanitarian groups reported that thousands of civilians were tortured and killed by security forces. Mr. Amin was overthrown in 1979 after an invasion by the Tanzanian Army and Ugandan exiles. President Milton Obote was elected in 1980. Administration officials traced the resurgence of human rights abuses in Uganda to increased Government efforts to combat opposition guerrillas. As army units stepped up attacks against forces from the National Resistance Army, the main insurgent group, they killed many innocent civilians, the American officials said. The worst abuses, they said, have taken place in the Luwero Triangle, the homeland of the Baganda tribe. Suspected of Backing Rebels In some cases, the officials said, Ugandan Army units reportedly rounded up hundreds of Baganda and shot them on the spot. The officials said the tribe was suspected by the army of supporting the rebels. Most army members are from the Langi and Acholi tribes, which support Mr. Obote. Administration and relief officials in Washington said it was difficult to determine exactly how many civilians had been killed. Although the end of food assistance to tens of thousands has contributed to chronic malnutrition and led to cases of starvation, they said it was impossible to find out how many deaths could be attributed to the food cutoff. The disruption of the food assistance program, the officials said, was part of an army drive to break up refugee camps because they are suspected of supporting rebel forces. Along with the military aid program, the United States gave Uganda $9 million this year for three educational and medical programs administered by the Agency for International Development. Uganda also has more than $400 million in loans from the International Monetary Fund, an Administration official said. The Administration is considering how best to use its limited leverage in Uganda to press for an end to the killings. ''Right now,'' a State Department official said, ''all we can do is make the abuses a public issue and hope international pressure will help.''"
