"Gen. Samuel K. Doe, the Liberian head of state, today ordered the release of two American citizens detained four months on charges of taking part in a coup attempt. The detention and accusations of abuse of the two American businessmen, Curtis Hayes Williams and James Bush, had drawn protests from the United States Congressional Black Caucus and from Amnesty International. Liberia's Information Minister, J. Emmanuel Bowier, said today that the two Americans and a Liberian co-defendant would be freed in Monrovia, the capital, on Wednesday. He said General Doe had received letters of apology from the men and decided that their release would be ''a manifestation of good will'' toward President-elect Bush. [Ramsey Clark, the former United States Attorney General who has been acting as a lawyer for Mr. Williams and Mr. Bush, said the letter was not a confession. ''It explains what happened and says that there was no intent to commit a criminal act,'' Mr. Clark said in New York. ''And no criminal act occurred.''] Substantial U.S. Aid Recipient Liberia is the largest per-capita recipient of American aid in sub-Saharan Africa. [In Washington, the State Department said Mr. Williams and Mr. Bush were released on Tuesday. Frances Jones, a spokeswoman for the Bureau of Consular Affairs, said that they may have to appear in court on Wednesday but that ''we anticipate their departure from Liberia on Nov. 17.''] Authorities in Monrovia said the two Americans were arrested after they entered Liberia with an armed group led by J. Nicholas Podier, a former deputy to Mr. Doe. Mr. Podier was killed in a gun battle and the two Americans were arrested, the Government said. But Mr. Williams's wife, Gwendolyn, said they were arrested when they entered Liberia on a business trip. In September, Amnesty International said it had received reports that they were beaten in a 10-day period before American consular officials first saw them in Monrovia on July 22. Amnesty International also said it had received reports that Mr. Podier had been ''extrajudicially executed by the security forces after being arrested'' at a Liberian airport. A letter that James Bush managed to send home to North Carolina said the two had been tightly handcuffed, beaten and kept nude. The Liberian authorities denied any ill treatment. In September, both Americans and a Liberian, Mark Johnson, were formally charged with treason. Originally settled by black Americans, Liberia became an independent republic in 1847. Meanwhile, Mr. Williams, a New Jersey native, was able to draw attention in the United States through a network of friends dating back to his involvement in civil rights campaignsin the 1960's. Julian Bond, the former Georgia State Senator, and Andrew Young, the Mayor of Atlanta, helped form a support group. New Jersey legislators in Washington and other members of the Congressional Black Caucus wrote to General Doe on behalf of the imprisoned businessmen."
