"The Government of President Mobutu Sese Seko has arrested and sent into internal exile two leaders of the main opposition grouping, which has called for changing Zaire's one-party state into a two-party system. State Department officials and many Western diplomats have expressed concern to Zaire's Government about these moves, which include ''rusticating'' Tshisekedi Wa Mulumba, who has served as Interior Minister and Justrice Minister of the Central African nation and who is now one of the leaders of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress. Acclaimed on U.S. Visit Mr. Tshisekedi, who has been sent from Kinshasa, Zaire's capital, to a small, isolated northeastern town close to the Sudanese border, was warmly received by many members of Congress and by West European officials when he traveled to the United States and Europe last fall. Birindwa Ci Birhashira, a former top economic adviser to President Mobutu, has also been sent into internal exile. He is being held in a remote mining town surrounded by dense forest in eastern Zaire. After the Mobutu Government improved its human rights record in the late 1970's under pressure from the Carter Administration, there has been some backsliding by the Zairian regime in recent years, according to many of Mr. Mobutu's domestic critics and to many diplomats. Since taking power in a coup in 1965, President Mobutu, then a general, has consolidated his position in this large, mineral-producing country by winning over some opponents and sending others to prison or into internal exile. One of U.S.'s African Allies Mr. Mobutu, a close African ally of the United States, has long been criticized for human rights violations, and some members of Congress turn up the pressure to reduce aid to Zaire whenever the rights situation there worsens. Mr. Tshisekedi has gained the reputation of being a prominent opponent of President Mobutu. He has led demonstrations against the Zairian head of state, called for a boycott of the nation's one-party elections and urged civil disobedience. According to family members and political allies, Mr. Tshisekedi has been sent to Doruma, a town that attracts many Sudanese refugees. In a telephone interview, Gabriel Lusangu, Mr. Tshisekedi's brother and a law professor in Antwerp, Belgium, said, ''There have often been clashes between Zaire and the Sudan there, and we're worried that something could happen to him during such a clash.'' An Architect of System In 1967, Mr. Tshisekedi was instrumental in writing a document that helped set up President Mobutu's one-party system. But in 1981, he was one of 13 members of Parliament who broke with the leader. They signed a letter accusing the Government of widespread corruption, human rights violations and a stifling of democracy. Since signing that letter, Mr. Tshisekedi has been arrested nine times, including on Jan. 17, when he led a demonstration in Kinshasa upon returning from his trip overseas. According to witnesses and Western diplomats, more than 1,000 people participated in the demonstration, and more than 100 were arrested. Mr. Tshisekedi was freed in mid-March but subjected to under house arrest. On April 8, he was again seized and sent into internal exile, first in the former Belgian fortress of Dungu, and then to nearby Doruma. The day before that arrest, news agencies published reports of a letter he had written, calling Mr. Mobutu the ''Zairian Caligula,'' and urging a boycott of coming local elections. Just before his rearrest, Zairian policemen stopped a car carrying a letter that was to be signed by leaders of opposition groups. The letter criticized President Mobutu for not adhering to promises he reportedly made last summer to allow greater freedom of expression and democracy. According to several members of the Union for Democracy and Social Progress, Mr. Mobutu made such pledges after meeting with opposition leaders at his palace in northern Zaire. In an interview in the eastern town of Bukavu, Mr. Birindwa's wife, Lucia, said she was not being allowed to see her husband. She said he is being kept in Kampene, 250 miles west of Bukavu, his hometown. Mrs. Birindwa said that officials had told her that he began a hunger strike on April 29. According to family members, Western diplomats and members of the opposition political groups, neither Mr. Birindwa nor Mr. Tshisekedi has been charged with any crime. These informants add that several other, less prominent opposition figures have also been sent into internal exile. Zairian officials defend the moves against the two men by saying that the Belgians, as colonial rulers, carried out the same practice three decades ago against advocates of independence for the land then called the Belgian Congo. They also argue that internal exile is more humane than prison."
