"To the Editor: Readers interested in Liberia and U.S. policy toward Gen. Samuel K. Doe's Government are poorly served by your Oct. 26 and Jan. 23 editorials. Liberia's heritage is one of minority rule by an oligarchy (the Americo-Liberians) that monopolized the political process for over a century and a quarter. The bloody coup of 1980 brought to power noncommissioned officers from the previously disenfranchised groups. Given the extent of U.S. interests in the country - e.g., key communications facilities and major investments, and the moral responsibility of our historical relationship - we have made a major effort to help the new rulers confront their problems. Our only other option was to walk away from Liberia. Neither the previous Administration nor this one took that approach. Both have been right. Since 1980 we have provided greatly increased financial assistance to restore economic stability. The Liberian Government pledged a return to civilian rule within five years. Despite opposition from within the military, attempted coups and foiled assassinations, the pledge has been fulfilled. The process has not been as free as we wanted. The election had serious shortcomings, particularly in vote counting. But in a part of the world where the norm is single-party rule, Liberia has universal franchise, a multiparty legislature, independent newspapers and radio stations, and a constitution specifying civil rights and defining limits on government power. Are we comparing Liberia with New England or the bulk of the rest of the world? Your two editorials are riddled with error. For example, U.S. legislation did not mandate an aid cutoff if the Liberian elections were not free and fair, and most successful opposition candidates have chosen to take their seats in the legislature, not boycott it. There has been brutality in Liberia. During the November coup attempt, members of Government were stripped, beaten and otherwise molested. Many of the soldiers who were coup participants were summarily executed. There was a settling of scores among ethnic groups in Monrovia and elsewhere. The Government called for an end to such violence, declared a curfew and warned the military that soldiers would be punished for abusing captives. Human-rights problems persist. Two opposition leaders, including Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, are still being held for treason trials. At our request, American officials have visited them, and the Liberian Government has agreed to permit international observers at their trials if they should occur. We continue to press the Government to charge or release other civilians detained in connection with the November coup attempt. Our Government has communicated its concern about the October elections and human-rights abuses after the attempted coup to the Doe Government, and we have been active in bringing about remedies. Moreover, our concern will be reflected in assistance for Liberia this year. We are prepared to suspend disbursement of aid if necessary to underline concern on human rights. To withdraw support for Liberia's economic development, as you urge, would sacrifice the tentative steps taken toward representative government in Liberia, penalize the Liberian people economically, undercut our significant national interests there and reduce our own influence. It could also provoke much more of the brutality you decry. CHESTER A. CROCKER Asst. Secy. of State, African Affairs Washington, Feb. 3, 1986"
