"When the Hutu militias began killing Tutsi in April, Ladislas Benimana, a Hutu, harbored Tutsi in his house, his wife and neighbors recalled. After several weeks, when the militia started raping women, his wife, Catherine Mujawamariya, a secondary school teacher, fled Kigali with their own daughters and several Tutsi women and children they were protecting. Mr. Benimana remained until Kigali fell to the Tutsi rebel army of the Rwandan Patriotic Front in early July, when he fled to the French-protected zone in the southwest, along with thousands of other Hutu uncertain about their fate under the new Tutsi-led Government. But when the new Government called on the refugees to come home, and especially civil servants, Mr. Benimana, who had worked for the Finance Ministry for 21 years, returned along with his 18-year-old son and 14-year-old daughter. Two days later, at about 11 P.M. on Aug. 4, soldiers came and took them away, his wife said. She has not seen them since. The Benimana case is not an isolated one, senior civilian judicial authorities said. ""It is exactly what happened at the end of the previous regime,"" the prosecutor for Kigali, Francois Xavier Nsanzuwera, said of the disappearances. ""It is very dangerous."" Mr. Nsanzuwera, who confirmed that Mrs. Mujawamariya had been to see him, said the Justice Minister had instructed police and military commanders on the law of arrest and detention, which bars soldiers from making arrests and requires that anyone arrested be brought before a prosecutor within 48 hours. Mr. Nsanzuwera said the instructions were ""not being respected."" The senior judge in Kigali, Gratien Ruhorahoza, who did apply the law and released some detainees after determining that there was no basis for the charges against them, was himself abducted from his house by two soldiers and a man in civilian clothes on the night of Oct. 2, Mr. Nsanzuwera said. Mr. Ruhorahoza has not been seen since. Amnesty International released a report this week accusing the Rwandan Patriotic Front of engaging in killings, abductions and other human rights abuses. All of the incidents mentioned in the report, except for one, occurred during the civil war, before the rebel front assumed control of the Government in mid-July. Along with the disappearances, there have been persistent reports of returning Hutu refugees' being killed, particularly in rural areas. One senior Government official said that in early August about 60 people were executed in the southern town of Butare. And last month, a patrol of United Nations soldiers saw about 50 bodies in a village 10 miles north of Butare; Rwandan soldiers prevented them from investigating further. More than 6,500 people are being held in Rwandan prisons, according to the Justice Ministry, but this does not include those being illegally detained in military camps, the number of which is not known to the civilian authorities, but is thought to be several thousand. Various explanations are advanced for the disappearances, by Rwandan Government officials as well as by United Nations officials and relief workers. It is widely known that the military is picking up and interrogating people suspected of having been involved in the genocide, which for some Tutsi soldiers is every Hutu. More worrisome is that radical Tutsi in the new Government are out to eliminate Hutu intellectuals. And finally, the power of the state is being abused for personal gain. Leodomir Bagulijoro, who disappeared on Aug. 25, may have suffered on two of these counts. He was a university-educated mathematician who had studied in Europe. Mr. Bagulijoro fled Kigali with his wife and five children during the fighting in April. They returned in August, after hearing the Government say that those who had not taken part in the killings could return. ""It sounded very good,"" recalled his wife, Jane Kanakuze, who had been a bank teller. ""We really thought we could start working again."" Her husband had been a customs inspector and had worked at the Ministry of Finance. When they returned, they found their house occupied by someone else, a common occurrence for returning refugees. The occupant said she had been given the house by the military. Mr. Bagulijoro managed to get his house back, but then his troubles began. On two occasions, he was visited by men who asked questions about his finances and politics, Mrs. Kanakuze said. Then, at 6:30 one morning, there was a knock on the door, and a man asked for Mr. Bagulijoro, who was still in bed. When he went outside, he found two soldiers, and they hustled him into a white Volkswagen van and took him away, his wife said. Mrs. Kanakuze has gone to the police, the Justice Minister and the Kigali prosecutor for information about her husband. No one has been able to tell her where he is, she said. When Alphonse Kirimobenecyo was similarly unsuccessful in locating his two brothers, who disappeared on Sept. 10, he resorted to offering money to soldiers to find them. Eventually, he learned that they were being held at a military camp in Kigali. Based on communications he has managed with his brother, through unofficial channels, Mr. Kirimobenecyo believes that there are 400 men being detained in this camp. The oldest of the brothers, 33-year-old Jean de Dieu Nsengimana, had been a soldier in the former army, but had deserted in March, after being accused of being a spy for the rebels, Mr. Kirimobenecyo said. Mr. Nsengimana had fled to Zaire, but he returned in August, with his wife and several orphans, and immediately reported to a military post. Shortly afterward, he was picked up off the street. Some families who suffered under the former Government are suffering under the new one. One Hutu recounted how his 22-year-old daughter was clubbed to death by Hutu militia in April ""because she looked like a Tutsi."" The man, a 55-year-old chauffeur, said he did not want to be named because he feared that soldiers would kill his 30-year-old son, who was detained for questioning on Sept. 18 after the new authorities said he could return from Zaire. The man has been told by soldiers that his son is being held at a military camp in Cyangugu, which is on the border with Zaire. But when he has gone to the camp, officers have said they have no knowledge of his son, who worked as an accountant at the Seventh-day Adventist Church. ""I knew him,"" said a church member who is senior employee at a Western embassy here. ""I knew his thoughts and what he believed in. He was not involved in politics. He wanted to come back and resume his mission with the church."" Map shows the locaton of Kigali."
