"United States marines evacuated 21 more foreigners from Liberia today, including several Americans, as a rebel leader who seized more than a dozen hostages on Monday threatened to attack the 237 marines protecting the American Embassy in Monrovia. The rebel leader, Prince Johnson, said his forces would attack the marines if the United States or other foreign troops did not intervene to end Liberia's seven-month-old civil war. Mr. Johnson seized 14 to 16 hostages on Monday, including one American, Chris Mende, a 27-year old mining engineer from Sacramento, Calif. In Washington, the Bush Administration reiterated its demand that the hostages be released immediately and warned that the United States would not hesitate to use force to defend its interests in Liberia. ''The marines are in Monrovia to protect the embassy and the Americans there,'' said the State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler. ''They will do that with force if necessary.'' U.S. Force Off Coast In response to threats from Mr. Johnson to seize hostages, the Marines on Sunday flew a reinforced rifle company of 225 marines to evacuate 74 people, mostly American Embassy officials and their dependents. The marines evacuated 19 more people on Monday and at least 21 today, a State Department official said. The official said they were a mix of Americans and other foreigners. The marines sent to the embassy are part of a 2,100-strong Marine Amphibious Ready Group that has been stationed off the Liberian coast. They joined a Marine guard already at the embassy, for a total of 237 marines. If the marines were attacked, the task force could send Cobra attack helicopters and Harrier attack planes, as well as ferry additional troops in Sea Knight and Sea Stallion transport helicopters, Pentagon officials said. In Gambia, five West African countries announced at the end of a two-day summit meeting that troops and a naval task force led by a Ghanaian commander and a deputy commander from Guinea would soon leave for Liberia. Hostages Are Shown In a news conference today at his headquarters on the outskirts of Monrovia, Mr. Johnson presented eight of the foreign hostages and said he would not free them until a peacekeeping force arrives, The Associated Press reported. State Department officials reported sporadic firefights in the capital today, with occasional artillery fire largely directed from the parts of the city controlled by President Samuel K. Doe to the north and east, where Mr. Johnson's has a stronghold. Forces loyal to a rival rebel leader, Charles Taylor, have been stopped by Mr. Doe's troops east of the capital. The rival rebel groups accuse Mr. Doe, who seized power in a violent coup in 1980, of human rights abuses."
