"After fleeing his homeland three weeks ago to avoid arrest, Wole Soyinka, the Nigerian playwright and Nobel Prize winner, came to Washington today to publicize human rights abuses by his nation's military Government and to urge the United States to begin an economic boycott against his country. Mr. Soyinka condemned Nigeria's dictator, Gen. Sani Abacha, as ""uncivilized"" and ""sadistic"" as he criticized him for executing opponents, jailing writers and pro-democracy advocates and closing more than a dozen newspapers. In a news conference at the Washington office of Amnesty International, Mr. Soyinka described the Abacha Government, which seized power 13 months ago, as ""a terrorist organization whose stock in trade is hostage-taking."" He said General Abacha has concluded that jailing prominent Nigerians is the only way he can get other countries to treat him with respect. Mr. Soyinka, who in 1986 became the first African to win the Nobel Prize for Literature, fled to Europe last month after being told that Nigerian military authorities were planning to arrest him. The Government had already raided his office, seized his passport and banned two of his books. Seeking to capitalize on his fame to highlight the crisis in Nigeria, Africa's most populous country, Mr. Soyinka called on the United States to spearhead an international effort to isolate the military Government and urged it to freeze Nigerian assets and push for a United Nations boycott. President Clinton has sent messages to General Abacha urging him to restore democracy. The Administration has cut off all economic aid, except for food and medicine and has hinted at freezing Nigerian assets. The 60-year-old dramatist, who was chairman of one of Nigeria's leading human rights groups, said he was seeking to draw attention ""to the enormity of the potential catastrophe in Nigeria and the severity of the human rights crisis."" He said that unless international pressure forced General Abacha to change his ways, Nigeria would move in one of two disastrous directions: either widespread factional fighting involving General Abacha would turn Nigeria into another Somalia, or the General could brutally consolidate power and become another Idi Amin, a Ugandan leader who was known for his reign of terror. ""I urge the United States community and the international community to wake up to the potential Somalia which Nigeria is today,"" he said. Among the prisoners held by General Abacha is the victor in Nigeria's 1993 presidential election, Moshood Abiola, whom the Government has charged with treason, and Kenule Saro-Wiwa, who is one of Nigeria's best-known writers and president of the Movement for the Salvation of the Ogoni People, an ethnic group in southeastern Nigeria. Mr. Soyinka said Nigerians would back economic sanctions for the same reasons South African blacks did: they might hurt, but they are worthwhile because they would help in the long term. Suggesting that sanctions would hurt the elite and not the average Nigerian, he said many people were already scavenging through trash bins to find scraps of food."
