"Human rights became a global goal 40 years ago, when the United Nations unanimously adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Private organizations like Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch have publicized and condemned abuses, and advanced the principle that everyone is entitled to basic legal, political, economic and cultural rights. A measure of their success can be seen during New York's first Human Rights Watch Film Festival, which begins today at the Public Theater (425 Lafayette Street). The two-week series, which is presented by the theater and Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, includes about 40 documentary and feature films and videos about repression, poverty, violence and racism in such countries as South Africa, the Soviet Union, Chile, Cuba and the Philippines. ''Each film represents a statement of outrage, but the question is how to mobilize that outrage and make it an effective means of ameliorating human-rights abuses,'' said Aryeh Neier, the executive director of Human Rights Watch. ''Film has an immediacy to make things we're concerned about much more vivid and dramatic,'' he said. Emphasis on Documentaries The film program director at the Public, Fabiano Canoso, noted that the majority of the films were documentaries. ''Most are documentaries because documentaries act somewhat like monitors, by exposing what's going on,'' he said. However, several classic political dramas, like ''The Confession'' by Costa-Gavras, Andrzej Wajda's ''Man of Iron'' and Gillo Pontecorvo's ''Battle of Algiers,'' also will be screened. ''There is a militancy in the films, but we wanted to create a balanced view,'' Mr. Canoso said. Susan Osnos, a Human Rights Watch spokeswoman, said that the festival ''tries to make the point that abuses occur around the world, under various types of governments, and range from torture and political imprisonment to censorship and denial of due process.'' . Apartheid in South Africa is approached from several perspectives in the series. Sharon Sopher's ''Witness to Apartheid'' documents violence and despair during the country's 1985 state of emergency. A painting by Leon Golub about South African police attacking demonstrators is featured in ''Golub.'' And ''Voices of Sarafina'' focuses on the black South African actors in the current Broadway hit. Timerman's Story ''Prisoner Without a Name, Cell Without a Number,'' directed by Linda Yellen and starring Roy Scheider and Liv Ullmann, is based on Jacobo Timerman's personal story of imprisonment and torture by the Argentine military junta during the 1970's. ''Fire From the Mountain'' is Deborah Shaffer's documentary about a leader of the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua; ''Eyes of the Birds,'' is a grim look at a Uruguayan prison, and ''Haiti Dreams of Democracy,'' Jonathan Demme and Jo Menell's video, interweaves politics, music and religion. The Middle East is also the object of film makers' scrutiny. Israel's troubled history is explored in Victor Schonfeld's three-hour epic ''Shattered Dreams.'' Rare film of 1930's Palestine and footage of Palestinian families today are included in Tom Hayes's ''Native Sons: Palestinians in Exile.'' And the tumult of Iran's 1979 revolution is shown in Rafigh Pooya's ''In Defense of People.'' Movies About Asia In Christian Blackwood's ''Signed, Lino Brocka,'' a Philippine film maker bitterly discusses poverty, creativity and repression in his native country. A searing account of one man's return to Cambodia after the ravages of war and Pol Pot's genocide is presented in Martin Duckworth's ''Back to Kampuchea.'' Tengiz Abuladze's ''Repentance'' is an allegorical film that created a sensation when it was first shown in the Soviet Union two years ago because of its frank and earnest depiction of the horrors of Stalinism. The Western world is not spared attention either. The two movies concerning the United States are ''Female High Security Unit,'' which looks at imprisoned women who had been involved in the Puerto Rican independence movement, and ''The Color of Honor,'' a chronicle of Japanese-American soldiers and detainees during World War II. Programs are scheduled every day except Mondays. Tickets are $5; $4 for students and the elderly. Schedule information: 598-7171."
