"Score a victory for humanity and realism in South Africa. A breakthrough agreement was reached Tuesday to establish a Transitional Executive Council in which blacks for the first time will share a governing role with a white minority regime. Probably starting in October, President F. W. de Klerk will have to consult with blacks on the council and its seven sub-councils on organizing a new security force, punishing human rights crimes and sharing state funds, files and television. That's change, and it puts enormous momentum behind the movement toward multiracial democracy. All this is subject to formal approval by a white-dominated Parliament, and the pact is already being assailed as a betrayal by die-hard defenders of apartheid and black leaders afraid of submitting to democratic, secret voting. But the pact has broad public and political support, and there's every reason to assume a successful transition heading into South Africa's first truly national elections next April 27.  In shaping this agreement, white and black South Africans have learned over a three-year period to work with, and listen to, each other. The result is a consensual spirit that bodes well for the next steps. Much credit goes to the candor, flexibility and uncommon horse sense of Mr. de Klerk and his chief bargaining partner, Nelson Mandela, leader of the African National Congress -- which was banned and assailed as Communist by previous leaders of Mr. de Klerk's National Party. But just as important has been the role of ordinary South Africans, black and white, who were disgusted with the cruelties and absurdities of apartheid. The extent of the progress can be measured by looking back. From the moment of its election in 1948, the National Party began imposing total segregation. It divided a huge black majority into separate ""nations,"" a fiction to justify denial of basic rights. A race-obsessed regime classified its citizens into a dozen categories, including Cape Colored, Cape Malay, Griqua, Indian, Chinese, Other Asiatic and Other Colored -- but only whites could vote. ""When I talk of the nation of South Africa,"" said Prime Minister Hendrik Verwoerd in 1961, ""I talk of the white people of South Africa."" This exclusionary principle extended from the classroom to the bedroom. As Dr. Verwoerd said to justify huge reductions in school expenditures for blacks, ""What is the use of teaching a Bantu child mathematics?"" The fruit of this ideology for whites was a privileged existence and cheap labor; for blacks, poverty and oppression. All these attitudes persist, and still threaten the transition to democracy. Unsurprisingly, the pro-apartheid Conservative Party is hanging back from the Transitional Council. But harder to understand or excuse is the spoiler stance of the Zulu-based Inkatha Freedom Party and its leader, Mangosuthu Buthelezi. He has tacitly made common cause with white extremists who oppose any extension of the franchise to blacks. His demands for greater local rights smell like a pretext for avoiding a test at the polls of his popular standing. Americans can play a helpful role in South Africa's transformation, first by lifting any remaining economic sanctions meant to punish the racist system that is disappearing, and then by pressing for the fullest possible participation of all South Africans in the interim regime and the April elections. South Africa now needs not just American sympathy but trade and investments to revive a stagnant private sector. This extraordinary drama is still in its first act."
