"With the South African Government resorting to increasingly brutal repression and widespread censorship to conceal its actions from the outside world, the White House has announced a ''review'' of American policy to deal with the ''new situation,'' and the Administration may unveil new initiatives this week. But the policy changes being discussed - reshuffling our diplomats in Pretoria and increasing American contacts with anti-apartheid leaders - will have little significance unless there is a fundamental shift in the views of the President himself. Without exception, every time that he has been questioned about South Africa since taking office, President Reagan has defended the white minority regime. Although he routinely denounces apartheid as ''repugnant,'' he consistently refuses to move beyond the abstraction of apartheid to criticism of the South African Government itself. Instead, the President repeatedly praises that regime for its ''reforms'' and defends its crack- downs as justified by ''violent'' or ''riotous'' blacks. Other United States officials have criticized Pretoria's policies, but it is what is said by the President himself that sets the position of the United States and is causing so much consternation among opponents of apartheid and supporters of human rights. To cite some typical examples: on March 21, 1985, President Reagan was asked about ''17 blacks who were shot to death today by Government authorities.'' He tried to place at least some of the blame on the black protestors: ''I think to put it that way -that they were simply killed and that the violence was coming totally from the law and order side - ignores the fact that there was rioting going on in behalf of others there.'' A South African judicial commission later reported that the victims were peaceful mourners in a funeral procession. On July 18, 1985, when Mr. Reagan was asked about a South African raid on Botswana that killed 12 people, he maintained that his policy was working - ''We think we have been successful in getting some concessions'' - and that cross-border attacks might be justified. On Aug. 5, 1985, the President defended South Africa's imposition of a state of emergency as a necessary response to black protest. On this occasion, his comment prompted an appreciative reaction from South Africa's state radio: ''South Africa has no more dependable ally . . . than the President of the United States.'' On Aug. 26, 1985, the President made his most breathtaking claim: ''They have eliminated the segregation that we once had in our own country.'' After retreating from this misstatement, the President said: ''I may have been careless in my language in that one thing, but I was talking about improvements that actually do exist there and have been made.'' At his most recent press conference, on June 13, President Reagan was asked to condemn the reimposed state of emergency and the detention without charge of thousands of anti-apartheid leaders. He hedged, stating that he was not in a position to judge Pretoria's actions: ''It's awfully hard when you're not involved in that.'' South Africans also notice what President Reagan has never said. He has never mentioned the systematic torture of political dissidents. He has not commented on the mass detention and mistreatment of children. He has refused to criticize the Draconian measures imposed last month on journalists. He has failed to acknowledge Pretoria's responsibility for arming and inciting a tiny minority of pro-Government blacks to attack blacks opposing apartheid. What has been the effect of President Reagan's statements? It is naive to believe that apartheid could be eliminated if only he used tougher language. But his statements are widely reported in South Africa and are regarded as evidence by supporters and opponents of apartheid alike that the United States is basically in sympathy with the white minority regime. His statements of support have largely neutralized pressure for fundamental change by the State Department and Congress. And his apparent insensitivity to the legitimate grievances of the black majority will surely jeopardize American relations with any future black government. Pressure by the Administration for change in South Africa will not work until the President himself is on board. Only then, will America be seen in South Africa as the last best hope for peaceful change instead of the last best friend of apartheid."
