"Somalia's armed forces rounded up thousands of people and summarily executed 46 men after Muslim riots that left 400 dead, a human rights group and independent sources said today. The Government said the reports were sensational propaganda and lies. The violence on July 14 in Mogadishu, the capital of the East African nation, followed the assassination of a Roman Catholic bishop and the arrests of Muslim religious leaders. The human rights group Africa Watch and other sources put the number killed in the riots at about 400. The Government has said 23 people died and 59 were injured in violence that it blamed on ''troublemakers.'' 'Sensational Propaganda' The Government has forbidden journalists from visiting Somalia since heavy fighting broke out between government forces and the northern rebel Somali National Movement in 1988. Telecommunications with the country are difficult. The Somali Embassy in Washington relayed a statement issued by the Foreign Ministry in Mogadishu that said: ''After last week's events in Mogadishu, enemies of the Somali people and their collaborators have been disseminating sensational propaganda, lies about the true situation in Somalia. The sources of such malicious disinformation are terrorist groups whose ultinmate motive is to spread chaos throughout the country.'' Africa Watch, in a statement released in Nairobi, said that more than 1,000 people were injured but many were afraid of going to the hospital for fear of arrest. U. S. Calls Reports 'Credible' Throughout the evening of the riots and the following night, witnesses said, soldiers went from house to house arresting men, raping women and looting. Africa Watch said about 2,000 people were arrested during the searches. Forty-six people were accused in military courts of having participated in the violence, found guilty and taken to a beach outside Mogadishu where they were shot to death, said Africa Watch, which has offices in Washington and London. In Washington, the State Department said it was disturbed by what it termed ''credible reports'' of executions in Somalia. ''We are directing our embassy in Mogadishu to raise our concern with the Somali Government and ask it to act to insure that civil liberties and human rights are fully protected,'' the department spokesman, Richard Boucher, said. In September, the human rights group Amnesty International said the Government of President Mohammed Siad Barre had executed up to 1,000 civilians while trying to end an insurgency in the north. In response, the United States Congress froze $55 million in aid to the impoverished nation. Violence Followed Arrests The violence on July 14 broke out after the arrests the previous day of four Muslim leaders and an unspecified number of civilians, the sources and Africa Watch said. In addition to the arrests of the Muslim leaders, the violence appeared to be linked to the July 9 slaying of Mogadishu's Roman Catholic Bishop, Salvatore Colombo, an Italian who had lived in Somalia for more than 40 years, Africa Watch said. The group said there was widespread suspicion in Mogadishu that Bishop Colombo had been assassinated by Government forces."
