"A black law-enforcement agency has been set up in black townships by the white authorities, and civil rights workers and anti-apartheid workers say it has instituted a harsh regime of beatings and torture. The deployment of the all-black municipal police force is said by some foes of apartheid to represent a trend across South Africa to augment formal law enforcement units with black auxiliaries whose job is both to ease pressure on regular army and police units and to translate the nation's racial conflict into a contest between blacks of opposed allegiances. Members of the all-black municipal police force are a distinct group from the army and the regular police who patrol the townships. Charges of Brutality One youth was said by lawyers to have been brutally dragged through township streets by the black police. A physician who has treated some victims said another 16-year-old endured a night of electric shock treatments and beatings. Lawyers said rape charges were also being prepared against some municipal policemen. The assertions in this southern city, among the most defiant of white rule in South Africa, seemed to reflect the failure of the nation's newest emergency decree to fully curb protest or stem the violence in this country. To the Government's critics, the deployment of black municipal policemen seems aimed at spreading responsibility for pacifying black townships among such auxiliary forces. The authorities say the emergency decree, the second in less than a year, has pacified some areas. But they assert that a ''revolutionary climate'' persists, justifying harsh tactics. Asked to comment on the charges of abuse, the Bureau for Information, the sole source of authorized news about the emergency decree, said in a telexed statement: ''A charge concerning the incarcerating of a person in a deep-freeze is presently being investigated. ''No sworn affidavit from persons who feel they have been maltreated has yet been received. Should anyone however feel that this is the case, they are free to file formal charges through the official channel. Statements made to the press by private individuals will not be investigated by the police.'' Anti-apartheid blacks here offer varying accounts of the effectiveness of the decree. A leading anti-apartheid campaigner, interviewed in hiding, said that while the mood among protesters had been made more sober and cautious by the decrees, defiance had not been crushed. A black lawyer with close knowledge of the anti-apartheid protest campaign here said: ''Physically, the state of emergency is working. The system is pretty much back in control on its own terms.'' ''But I don't think there are any people who are completely tired'' of resistance, he said. The lawyer was one of several anti-Government campaigners who agreed to be interviewed on condition they not be named. The strands of the conflict are diverse. Residents of Port Elizabeth's impoverished black townships of New Brighton, Zwide and KwaZakele, for instance, have again begun a boycott of white-owned businesses to press a wide range of demands. Earlier boycotts crippled some white businesses. At the same time, a kind of low-level war persists between the black youths who call themselves ''comrades'' and the security forces, including the municipal police. Five policemen, anti-apartheid workers said, have been killed in recent weeks by the ''comrades'' - burned, buried alive or shot with homemade rifles known as scorpions. Township Fenced In New Brighton township is surrounded by a high wall of razor-sharp wire laid by the army to sever it from other districts. All the high schools in Port Elizabeth's black townships have been closed because of classroom boycotts, and black residents are withholding rent payments. The authorities have opened a campaign to win cooperation from township residents, using pamphlets and leaflets that advertise official achievements on behalf of the black population and urge blacks to cooperate with the security forces. #16 Requirements Listed One pamphlet, dated Oct. 3, proclaimed: ''The security forces have now been in New Brighton for three months and have assisted the Ibhayi City Council in cleaning up your area, in protecting you and in stabilizing everyday life.'' The Ibhayi City Council is the officially sponsored local black authority. The pamphlet added: ''We must now, however, also have your support in achieving the following goals.'' It listed 16 requirements, including ''that no arson shall take place'' and ''that no petrol bombs will be thrown.'' ''If these conditions are not met,'' the pamphlet said, ''the security forces will remain and strict measures shall be taken.'' Foes of apartheid and other analysts suggest that the conflict between the municipal police and radical youths may be slipping out of control, since anti-apartheid leaders have been detained under the emergency decree and municipal policemen have become what one anti-apartheid worker called a ''law unto themselves.'' ''It is difficult now to convince young people that what they are doing is barbaric,'' said a black anti-apartheid worker who was interviewed in hiding, referring to killings by the comrades. ''They see it as being on a par with killings by the other side.'' The municipal policemen wear olive-green uniforms and receive three months training in the use of weapons and other skills. Charges Difficult to Verify Charges of improper behavior proliferate, while censorship, imposed under the emergency decree, and other restrictions on reporters' access to black townships prevent corroboration of some reports. A woman from a respected civil rights group said she had received six reports from different individuals that in one black township, a liquor outlet, the Qwaford Bottle Store, had been taken over by the army and that its large deep-freeze had been used to incarcerate prisoners overnight at a temperature just above 20 degrees. Civil rights workers charge that municipal policemen raid homes in the early hours of the morning and show scant regard for property. ''They knock once and then kick the door down,'' a civil rights worker said. Campaign Against Protest The thrust of the official campaign against Port Elizabeth's black protesters seems to have been directed at the area and street committees, set up by anti-Government radicals as an alternative form of administration. ''A lot of the 1,400 detainees in this area were not activists,'' a lawyer said, ''they were just ordinary people drawn into the street and area committees. But the police want to teach people a lesson: don't get involved.'' The municipal policemen, the lawyer said, ''are paid a lot of money and they are recruited from people who were the victims of the punitive measures of the comrades. ''They also include comrades who have been turned against their own people,'' he continued. ''They know where to go and they know the psychology of the people. They are pretty rough.'' The lawyer acknowledged that, before the latest emergency decree, blacks had become tired of what he called ''the apparent directionlessness of the violence that took place'' and that the authorities had curbed some of that violence. Anti-apartheid workers now, he said, ''are taking a bit of a breather.''"
