"The South African police disclosed today that they are holding a former narcotics detective in connection with the killings this year of two whites who were prominent in the struggle against apartheid. The police implied in a statement issued in Pretoria that the suspect may be part of a conspiracy. One of the slain whites, David Webster, a lecturer at the University of Witwatersrand, was shot on May 1 from a passing car in front of his house in Troyville, a Johannesburg suburb. He was completing a study of political killings in South Africa when he was slain. The other, Anton Lubowski, a civil-rights lawyer in Namibia, was shot in September outside his house in Windhoek. He was the most prominent white member of the South-West Africa People's Organization, an overwhelmingly black movement that won elections for a constituent assembly in Namibia this month. Mr. Lubowski also represented defendants in South Africa, most recently at a murder trial in Upington this year. Both killings were widely seen as motivated by the political activities of the two men. An Irish citizen was arrested in Windhoek after Mr. Lubowski's killing, but has not been charged with the crime for lack of evidence. 'In Detention for Some Time' In announcing that they were holding the former detective, the police said ''the person has been in detention for some time.'' The statement said, ''The police did not wish to announce his detention because this would have jeopardized an investigation which still had to be launched.'' The wording of the announcement supported speculation in Johannesburg newspapers this afternoon that the police had uncovered evidence of an assassination conspiracy. ''The possibility that further arrests may still be made is not excluded,'' the police statement said. The disclosure comes when the police are under renewed pressure to solve the killings as a result of assertions that police death squads have killed or terrorized those fighting apartheid in the past. A white former police captain and two black policemen have said they served in such a squad. One of the policemen is on death row awaiting execution for another killing while the former captain and the other policeman are reported to have fled abroad. President F. W. de Klerk received a report on an internal investigation into the death squad assertions on Wednesday and promised to give it urgent attention. The police statement today said the suspect in the killings of Mr. Webster and Mr. Lubowski was a 34-year-old white man who was dismissed as a police sergeant in 1984 after he was convicted on charges of murder, attempted murder and theft. He had been assigned as a detective in the narcotics bureau in the urban area west of Johannesburg. May Have Killed Suspect The statement did not give further details of his conviction, but he was understood to have killed a suspect in one of his investigations. Newspaper reports said he was arrested in his Johannesburg apartment several weeks ago by the Brixton murder and robbery squad, which handles major crimes in the Johannesburg area. It had been investigating Mr. Webster's death. The detention of the suspect under the current internal security regulations became known after his father filed an application in a Pretoria court to have him released. In Windhoek, Gerard Roux, a spokesman for South Africa's Administrator General in Namibia, confirmed to the South African Press Association that the police there were aware that the suspect had been arrested in connection with the investigation of Mr. Lubowski's killing but said they had not yet questioned him."
