"To the Editor: Flora Lewis's ''Mandela Must Judge Again,'' (column June 30) ignores the difference between a political struggle and an academic seminar on human rights. The struggle to rid South Africa of apartheid is a political enterprise that must take into consideration, in the words of Aristotle, the method and principles appropriate for its subject matter. Pragmatically and prudentially, Mr. Mandela understands what some civil rights advocates in the United States did not understand in the late 1960's and early 70's: that limits exist on how much good can be done and espoused effectively. Mr. Mandela recognizes that it is self-indulgent and irresponsible to conduct the struggle against apartheid in South Africa as if it were a dialogue in an academic seminar. Such an exercise would require him to condemn the violation of human rights anywhere and everywhere in the world, whether it helped or hurt his efforts to vindicate human rights in South Africa. Why should he take on the vindication of human rights in Libya, the Middle East and Cuba before he has substantially completed the struggle in South Africa, to say nothing about condemning leaders of countries or movements who have been indispensable allies in the earlier days of his struggle? The universalization of the civil rights movement and the displacement of blacks from its center stage are significant outcomes of the movement's failure to maintain its major focus upon the black struggle. Thus, despite the virtual overturn of apartheid or Jim Crowism legally in the United States, a substantial sector of the black community is still suffering grievously. A substantial sector of the black community is suffering because so much of the energy and driving force of the movement have been deflected toward Hispanic Americans, middle-class white women, homosexuals, the handicapped, the consumer, the children of the affluent, the aged and the environment, including the flora (Douglas firs, elms, redwoods) and fauna (snail darters, condors, spotted owls). Don't forget, the civil rights movement started out with blacks, continued to become a human rights movement and ended up as a universal rights movement, seeking to protect everybody, everything and everywhere, with blacks losing ground at each displacing development. KENNETH S. TOLLETT Distinguished Professor of Higher Education, Howard University   Washington, July 2, 1990"
