"With its continued commitment to apartheid, South Africa makes itself a tempting target for pressure from groups offended by official racism. Thus its application for a loan from the International Monetary Fund is stirring objections in the United Nations and Congress. Outright rejection of the loan on political grounds would mean that the fund could no longer serve its global purpose - to help any member in trouble. But approval with proper strings attached could help lift the shroud of South African injustice. The purpose of the I.M.F. is to help member countries when they have balance-of-payments problems. Together the monetary fund and a would-be borrower identify the sources of the problem, and the fund prescribes steps required to correct it. Politics and social issues are theoretically ignored, but it would be naive to deny that they are integral to any country's economy. South Africa's immediate problem isn't unusual: export earnings have collapsed, inflation rages and the economy is stagnating. The price of gold, the principal export, has plunged from more than $800 an ounce two years ago to the mid-$400's today. Prices are also weaker for other exports (diamonds and sugar), and the corn crop was poor. As a member in good standing, South Africa is entitled to draw on the fund. The proposed borrowing would be $1.1 billion. Approval for two-thirds of the amount, because of the drop in export earnings, is virtually automatic. The I.M.F. imposes no conditions on such loans, on the assumption that the situation will correct itself. But the other one-third, traceable to internal mismanagement, is subject to normal I.M.F. scrutiny. It is here that the monetary fund could strike at least a symbolic blow for humanity. Its rules generally prescribe painful austerity measures for any borrower - cuts in government subsidies, reduced tariff barriers and removal of other practices that inhibit smooth economic growth. South Africa's systematic repression of black workers is surely a relevant economic fact. Diplomatically but firmly, the fund can make an issue of that repression and press for progress. Would such a compromise offend a tradition of political purity at the I.M.F.? Not really. The agency has probably been more successful than any other international body in resisting politics. As far as is known, no loan has been made or denied solely for political reasons - although some have certainly been delayed. But the fund has a dirty little secret: although all 146 members should be represented by the 22 countries on its board, two are not - South Africa and Egypt - because no country is willing to represent them. Both still have full voting and borrowing rights, but their fellow members have put them at the back of the bus. The I.M.F., in other words, is by no means pristine now. And the larger point is that political and social issues are inseparable from a nation's economic well-being. The question, then, is whether the I.M.F.'s muscle can be used constructively. Denying the South African loan outright would set a destructive precedent. Let the fund raise the issue in negotiations over problems of the South African economy and acknowledge it in a few diplomatically worded observations attached to the loan. That would make an important political point without undermining the fund's integrity."
