"When Yoweri Museveni was sworn in as President of Uganda 18 months ago, he promised to bring law and order back to a nation that had endured years of nightmarish violence, repression and bloodshed. But since he seized power, Mr. Museveni himself has been accused of major human rights violations against those perceived as opponents by his Government. International relief officials, human rights organizations and prominent Ugandans have charged that Mr. Museveni's Government, while it may not be as brutal as those of past rulers, has committed abuses that bring into question whether the country's pattern of chaos can soon end. Mr. Museveni generally denies such charges. Nevertheless, the political opposition, independent human rights groups and international relief organizations accuse the Ugandan authorities of torturing prisoners and of indefinitely detaining without charge thousands of political opponents and rebel suspects in overcrowded and squalid military barracks and maximum security prisons. Ugandans who monitor the situation said more than 60 people died in such prisons between January and July of this year, largely because of disease, lack of food, water and clothing, inadequate medical care and grossly unsanitary conditions. Civilians Said to Be Detained Government soldiers, who were part of what was considered one of the most disciplined military forces in Africa when Mr. Museveni took power in 1986, are said by the political opposition, independent rights groups and clergymen to be detaining innocent civilians in the war-torn areas in eastern and northern Uganda. Boys over 10 years old in northern Uganda are systematically arrested to prevent them from joining the fragmented rebel movements, said several Ugandans who monitor human rights in the country. Also in the north, where the social fabric has all but completely unraveled, Government troops are accused by political opponents and rights groups of burning down Christian missions and evacuating nuns and priests in an attempt to remove independent witnesses who could testify to atrocities. They have been accused of robbing priests at gunpoint, indiscriminately murdering civilians and destroying houses and crops. A leading politician, Andrew Kayiira, was arrested on a charge of treason some months ago. Several sources in Uganda and abroad who have knowledge of the situation said his supporters, who had been fighting alongside Mr. Museveni's troops in the north, were rounded up and locked into freight containers, where 80 of them suffocated. Some critics of Mr. Museveni have charged that Government soldiers were the gunmen who later shot and killed Mr. Kayiira at the home of a Ugandan journalist less than two weeks after he was released from detention. The Government has denied involvement. Conditions Are Criticized At a news conference in July at the Organization of African Unity meeting in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, Mr. Museveni said that there was no ''deliberate torture'' by the Government. He said soldiers of his National Resistance Army who violated human rights would be arrested and tried. On the subject of prisons, Mr. Museveni said that he ''can't say that they are very good, because conditions in the whole country are not good either.'' Mr. Musevini said: ''I have heard reports that we torture, but I don't believe that is the problem. I think the problem is rather the conditions, adequate space, for instance, people not being squeezed in a cell.'' People who monitor human rights here suggest that the abuses are not a deliberate policy on Mr. Museveni's part and that he is trying to control the army and the Government security. As evidence, these people point to frequent courts-martial - as many as 400 soldiers are said to be in detention, awaiting trial for disciplinary offenses - and some public executions of soldiers found guilty of abuses. The National Resistance Army said in July that it had set up a military police unit to enforce discipline. Drop in Torture Method In addition, these people say, there has been a dramatic drop recently in the use of a method of torture in which the victim's hands and legs are tightly bound behind his back until he is paralyzed or dead. An independent group based in Kampala, the Uganda Human Rights Activists, said in its latest report, covering April to June, that the Government had brought about significant improvements in human rights in recent months. But the quarterly report that Government agencies continued to hold civilians in poor conditions without trial and to torture some suspects. The Government has established a commission investigating human rights between Uganda's independence in 1962 and January 1986, when Mr. Museveni took power. The rights group said in the report there had been a ''greatly diminished occurrence'' of politically motivated arrests, especially in areas not affected by the war and that branches of the Government were showing a much greater willingness to respect human rights. Detention Laws Condemned Yet critics of the Government say that the human rights situation is deteriorating and that Mr. Museveni must take direct blame. They condemn the President's use of detention laws established by previous governments to jail opponents without trial. Thousands of Ugandans have been detained under successive regimes since the detention act was introduced in 1964. These critics noted that the Secretary General of the Uganda Human Rights Activists, Lance Sera Muwanga, had been held in prison without charge since February. Mr. Muwanga was detained after he said in an interview published in a London-based magazine that the human rights record of Mr. Museveni's Government was worse than that of the Government of Idi Amin in the 1970's. ''After Museveni first became President, people felt safe for the first time,'' one Ugandan said. ''They were exposed to freedom of movement without hearing guns and they could talk openly. ''But reality had set in as time has gone on. Historically, it has been proved that that sense of security does not remain for long and now people are once again very, very tense.''"
