"At first glance, Casamance is, as usual, thronged with tourists these days. It is the peak of the European vacation season, and on the surf-scrubbed beaches at the tip of the continent's bulge, scores of parents, children and young lovers picnic or saunter along the white sands. But the seaside calm belies the troubles in Casamance. A series of shootings and bombings by a small separatist group has led the Government of President Abdou Diouf to take tough actions in recent weeks, measures that contrast sharply with Senegal's carefully nurtured reputation for peace and stability. Inland from the coast, there is an air of siege these days. Since last spring there has hardly been a week without another killing or assault by the Movement for the Democratic Forces of Casamance, which is seeking self-rule for this region of about 400,000 people. Along nearly every main thoroughfare in Ziguinchor, the region's leading city, roadblocks are manned by edgy khaki-clad soldiers. Heavily armed troops in steel-plated vehicles roam the roads at all hours. In Washington, the State Department has issued an advisory urging Americans to exercise ""extreme caution"" when traveling in the area. Rights Group Is Critical Terrorist assaults on unarmed civilians have inevitably stirred deep concern, but almost as disquieting is what many here view as the often brutal efforts by the central authorities to quell the uprising. Amnesty International said recently that it had received a growing number of reports from Casamance of ""torture and the use of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment on detainees suspected of being rebels or of providing food or armaments and other supplies to them."" The group said at least 11 people died in custody last year as a result of torture. ""The security forces seem to have subjected virtually all suspected rebel sympathizers or their relatives to beatings,"" the report said. Senegal insists the reports of human rights abuses are groundless. ""That's all exaggerated,"" the Senegalese Communication Minister, Moustapha Ka, said in an interview. ""In Senegal, it's not in our way of life to do such things. It is impossible for a Senegalese to do that."" Nonetheless, in Dakar, the capital, the reports of human rights abuses are widely believed. ""Torture is a reality, even if the Government denies it,"" said Babacar Toure, editor of the influential weekly newspaper Sud. Casamance's grievances go back a long way. Cut off from the rest of Senegal by Gambia, a tiny English-speaking country, the region has long maintained a distinct identity. For much of the 17th and 18th centuries, Portugal rather than France was the dominant colonial influence, and Basse Casamance, as it was called, was not integrated with the rest of the country until 1866. Ziguinchor, the regional capital, was taken over by France from Portugal two decades later. Significantly, while most of Senegal's north had converted to Islam by the turn of the century, many of Casamance's people retained their animist religious beliefs. Moreover, the Diola, the region's dominant ethnic group, is one of the few ethnic groups in Senegal that does not speak Wolof, the country's main traditional langauge. Customs Officers Killed At the same time, Casamance is Senegal's most fertile area, producing about half of the country's rice, cotton and corn. But there is a widespread feeling here that the north has somehow sprinted ahead of the south in education, business and industry and that, as a consequence, it is unfairly prospering. In recent years, residents say, road development was so poor that a trip of 20 miles from Ziguinchor would take as much as six hours. The feelings of resentment and neglect erupted in violence last April when two customs officers were killed by five gunmen. Two weeks later terrorists lobbed grenades into the crowd at a Muslim religious ceremony in Ziguinchor, killing two and wounding dozens. Since then, according to Government estimates, at least 25 people have been killed by the separatists and hundreds wounded. The Government has responded by rounding up hundreds of people accused of harboring terrorists or being sympathetic to their cause. So far, at least 300 people have been charged with sedition, sent north to Dakar and and are now awaiting trial. Critics, however, say the Government backlash has worsened tensions in the area. ""We live in fear of both the rebels and the Government,"" said a teacher from the north who intends to leave soon because of what he called a thinly camouflaged civil war. Others in Casamance, however, particularly moderate separatists who oppose violent groups but want more local self-rule, argue that the Diof Government reacted too strongly, more with an eye toward Senegalese politics than in reaction to the situation here. For many of Casamance's people, however, particularly the European hoteliers who have settled here, the Government crackdown was a welcome tonic after the events of recent months. ""I'm very depressed,"" said the manager of Le Katakaloue, a small hotel that was torched by the separatists in December. ""This season is ruined, a complete disaster."" ""These people are just like you and me,"" she added. ""You meet them during the day as ordinary people, but at night they put on their disguise on rebels. It's like the Basque separatist problem. They just want to be recognized."" Map of Senegal highlighting Casamance"
