"The House Foreign Affairs Committee approved measures today that would retain a legislative ban on military aid to Angolan rebels and tie military assistance to Argentina to improvements in its human rights record. Both measures drew bipartisan support, but Representative Edward J. Derwinski, Republican of Illinois, vowed to fight the actions on the House floor. The foreign affairs panel also voted unanimously to defer action on a request to lift restrictions on military aid to Pakistan until the State Department provides details of its $100 million military aid request for that country and outlines a nuclear nonproliferation policy. The votes came as the committee finished work on President Reagan's request for $6.6 billion in foreign military and economic aid for fiscal year 1982, which begins in October. The committee has cut the authorization to $6.026 billion, and a final vote on the aid bill is scheduled for tomorrow. Vote Taken With Almost No Debate The vote by the Democratic-dominated committee to retain the ban on military aid to anti-Marxist Angolan rebel factions was taken with virtually no debate. The House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa, led by Representative Howard Wolpe of Michigan, voted last month, 7 to 0, to retain the so-called Clark amendment, which essentially prohibits military assistance to Angolan rebels. The full committee's vote today was 19 to 5. Five Republicans voted against the measure: Mr. Derwinski; Robert J. Lagomarsino of California; Toby Roth of Wisconsin; William S. Broomfield of Michigan, and Benjamin A. Gilman of New York. Four Republicans, however, supported retaining the Clark provision: Millicent Fenwick of New Jersey; Jim Leach of Iowa; Arlen Erdahl of Minnesota, and Olympia J. Snowe of Maine. By voice vote, the committee added the conditions to the granting of military assistance to Argentina. The vote came after extended debate in which State Department officials and Republicans warned that singling out Argentina for human rights abuses would be counterproductive and would ignore improvements already made. ''No country can implement human rights in another country,'' warned Robert E. Service, a State Department official with Latin American responsibilities. 'Feedback' From the Senate The conditions, which require that President Reagan certify that ''significant progress'' is being made in addressing human rights abuses, are virtually identical to those added yesterday by the Senate Foreign Relations panel. Last week, the House committee voted to lift all restrictions on assistance to Argentina. But the Senate action yesterday spurred the House panel panel to reconsider the measure and adopt Senate language offered by Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland, who is chairman of the Subcommittee on Latin America. ''I think it was an excellent example of feedback from one body to another,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, who predicted that both actions would be upheld on the House floor. The Administration lobbied Senate Foreign Relations committee members intensively today on the Angola and Pakistan issues. Both matters are scheduled to be taken up by the Senate panel tomorrow."
