"The weekly newspaper of Uganda's ruling party said today that the United States was behind an international campaign to undermine the authority of the Ugandan Government. The newspaper, The People, published in the capital of Kampala, was referring to allegations by Elliott Abrams, an Assistant Secretary of State, that Uganda's human rights record was among the worst in the world. Mr. Abrams said in Congressional testimony and interviews that thousands of people had died by starvation or direct action by the army. ''The figure that circulates in Kampala is 100,000 to 120,000,'' he said. In response, the Ugandan weekly, which is published by the ruling Uganda People's Congress, quoted an unidentified Foreign Ministry official as having said, ''The public utterances of Mr. Abrams had all the elements of a carefully orchestrated campaign to undermine the image and authority of the Government of Uganda.'' The text of the article was obtained here by telephone from Kampala. The paper was dated Monday but it appeared on the streets today. On Aug. 7 Uganda responded to Mr. Abrams's remarks by suspending a military training agreement, recalling officers undergoing training in the United States, and barring an American military attache. It also made a diplomatic protest in Washington. Today the opposition Democratic Party called for a bipartisan inquiry to investigate ''the loss of life and property'' during recent Ugandan Army operations. A Democratic Party spokesman, Ojok Mulozi, said in Kampala that the party would introduce legislation in Parliament to set up an inquiry and to repeal a 1967 law that permits detention without trial. However, the ruling party has a large working majority and could easily defeat the motion. A British newspaper, The Daily Telegraph, quoted Ugandan Christian leaders as having said that Government soldiers massacred more than 100 people at a shrine for Christian martyrs that Pope John Paul II is scheduled to visit next year. It said the attack took place May 22. The Government has announced the arrest of one soldier in connection with the incident and said 12 people died in the attack. Britain Has No Confirmation LONDON, Aug. 15 (Reuters) - Britain said today that it had no independent confirmation of United States reports that thousands of people had been killed in Uganda. Official sources dismissed the idea that Ugandan Government policy had caused the deaths. ''There is no evidence to substantiate reports of hundreds of thousands being killed,'' the Foreign Office said, quoting an assessment from the British High Commission in Uganda. The Foreign Office asked its diplomatic representatives in Uganda for an assessment after the United States reports of large-scale massacres. British Government sources said there was no evidence to suggest that the Ugandan Government had embarked on a deliberate policy of killing innocent civilians."
