"After Maj. Pierre Buyoya seized power two weeks ago in this central African land, he moved to ease Government repression against the Roman Catholic Church, announced the release of at least 200 political prisoners and promised more democracy. The moves came as a balm to many Burundians, who had seen the tiny landlocked country evolve into what some described as a virtual dictatorship under the leadership of the former ruler, Jean-Baptiste Bagaza. People in Bujumbura, the drowsy capital, where there is scant military presence, speak of a sense of relief. ''We will now be allowed to go to the President and discuss problems,'' said Marius Rurahenye, general secretary of the Burundi Workers' Union and a former member of the country's Central Committee. ''Bagaza often went and talked to groups, but what he said was very different from what he did. That was not genuine dialogue.'' But while there appears to be widespread acceptance of the new military regime, some Burundians and Western diplomats say it is too early to assess whether a change in leadership will soon translate into dramatic changes in Government policy. Tutsi and Hutu Tensions A true test, they say, will be whether Mr. Buyoya moves to modify the balance of power between Burundi's dominant ethnic minority, the Tutsi, and the ethnic Hutu majority, which has long been politically and economically subservient. Mr. Buyoya, 38 years old, is ruling the country as head of a so-called Military Committee of National Redemption. He has charged that his predecessor put too much power into his own hands, violated the Constitution and fostered an incoherent economic policy. Western diplomats and Burundians say Mr. Buyoya often disagreed with Mr. Bagaza, who was toppled while he was attending a conference in Canada. He is now in Uganda.  The new leader, a Belgian-educated soldier who also took courses in France and West Germany, is said to be highly popular among younger army officers and to have a reserved demeanor. More Balance in Outside Ties Mr. Buyoya is expected to maintain the country's official policy of nonalignment, while more evenly balancing links with the West and Burundi's close ties to Libya and the Eastern bloc. Although Mr. Buyoya denounced the former Government's economic policy, diplomats here said they expected him to continue a program of economic liberalization in what is one of the world's poorest countries. In a radio address to the nation soon after seizing power, Mr. Buyoya, a Roman Catholic, pledged to respect freedom of worship. The statement suggested a more conciliatory approach to the Roman Catholic Church in Burundi, the population of which is 65 percent Catholic. His predecessor expelled most Catholic missionaries from the country, banned church lay organizations and permitted priests to offer mass only on weekends. Some people suggest that the takeover Sept. 3 was little more than a palace uprising by the same group of military officers who helped put Mr. Bagaza in power in a bloodless army coup in 1976. 'It Is the Same Group' Like his predecessor, Mr. Buyoya is a Tutsi, a group that makes up 15 percent of the country's five million people but which has long dominated the Hutus, who make up most of the rest of the population. ''It is the same group, the same army, the same Tutsi minority,'' a Western diplomat said, although he added that Mr. Buyoya's initial political moves had been ''very positive.'' ''We had to take a wait-and-see attitude,'' the diplomat said, ''but if the new Government had not intended to modify the positions of the past, I don't think we would have seen these initial steps.'' Mr. Bagaza, 41 years old, had been regarded as a peacemaker in one of Africa's most bitter tribal conflicts. That conflict had erupted in 1972, when Tutsi policemen and members of the party's youth group killed about 150,000 Hutus after Hutus killed several thousand Tutsis in an unsuccessful bid for majority rule. Despite his attempts at reconciliation, when Mr. Bagaza was deposed three-quarters of his Cabinet, three-quarters of the National Assembly, about two-thirds of the university students, 13 of 15 provincial governors, all the army officers and 96 percent of the enlisted soldiers were Tutsi. Dispute on Identifying Students And despite the Bagaza Government's denials of ethnic discrimination, human-rights groups earlier this year accused the former rulers of imprisoning a group of Hutu intellectuals after the leak of an official Government letter that was sent to some primary-school principals. In the letter, the principals were said to have been asked to provide lists of students that indicated Tutsis with an ''I'' and Hutus with a ''U.'' President Buyoya, who has dismissed all members of the former Government, the ruling party and the country's Judicial Council, has insisted that ''all sections of the public'' will be included in making decisions. But some diplomats and others say it will not be easy to improve the complex ethnic situation. The Tutsis, descendants of herdsmen from northern Africa, have for centuries held sway over the Hutus, who are generally peasant farmers of southern African Bantu stock. 'Profound Changes' Coming More than 70 years of German and Belgian colonial rule did little to change the situation. Since independence in 1962, every Government has been dominated by Tutsis. In a recent interview with Agence France-Presse, Mr. Buyoya challenged assertions that ethnic divisions existed. But he said there would be ''very positive and very profound changes in the direction of more social justice and genuine democracy.'' ''In one way or the other,'' he said, ''all sections of the public will be called upon to take part in the decision-making process. There are not and will not be any criteria based on ethnic or regional origins under the new regime.''"
