"The Government of South Africa has been stepping up its campaign this year against individuals and organizations monitoring human rights in that country, a rights group asserted in a report yesterday. The study by the group, Human Rights Watch, comes after South Africa this month extended the nationwide state of emergency for 12 months. The emergency decree, issued in June 1986, followed two years of unrest among blacks resisting the country's apartheid laws. This month South Africa also raised more accusations against the Detainees' Parents Support Committee, a civil-rights group; warned the British Broadcasting Corporation that it might be expelled, and clamped down on the reporting of anti-apartheid protests. Updating a Survey of Abuses Human Rights Watch - made up of Americas Watch, Asia Watch and Helsinki Watch - issued its report to update a survey listing the abuses and deaths suffered by human-rights monitors worldwide. The rights group is a project of the Fund for Free Expression, which is based in New York. It said Pretoria had increased its pressure on the Release Mandela Campaign, which is demanding freedom for Nelson Mendela, the imprisoned head of the African National Congress. Human Rights Watch said the ''alternate press,'' which has been monitoring human rights in South Africa, was being subjected to increasingly stringent regulations. The ''politically outspoken media'' now face censorship and suspension at the discretion of the Minister of Internal Affairs, it said. 'Significant Restrictions' The new report enlarges on the South Africa section of its report entitled ''The Persecution of Human Rights Monitors,'' issued in December 1987. Since then, Human Rights Watch asserted, ''significant restrictions'' were placed on 17 groups and 18 individuals. In addition, it said, the Government proposed legislation that would ''seriously curtail the operations of a wide range of extra-parliamentary organizations'' by denying them money. Currently, the rights group said, there are an estimated 2,500 to 3,000 people detained under the Emergency and Internal Security Act. The group said copies of its latest report, ''The Persecution of Human Rights Monitors in South Africa'' can be obtained for $4 apiece from Human Rights Watch, 36 West 44th Street, Room 911, New York, N.Y. 10036."
