"President Ahmed Sekou Toure of Guinea, saying that his nation had ''fabulous economic potential,'' today urged stepped-up American private investment in his impoverished West African country. Mr. Toure's comments, at a news conference, marked a full-fledged reversal of the policies he pursued in the 1960's and 1970's, which had turned his nation into a Marxist enclave. United States officials said that Mr. Toure's effort to spur investment in Guinea was a virtual acknowledgement that his Marxist experiment had failed. Although Guinea has nearly one-third of the world's bauxite, used in the production of aluminum, as well as rich uranium deposits, potential oilfields and diamond and silver mines, the country is one of the poorest in the world. Its annual per capita income is $140 and only 10 percent of the 5.3 million population is literate. The average life expectancy is 41 years and the infant mortality rate is very high. Rights Record Criticized In addition, Guinea's human rights record has been strongly criticized by organizations such as Amnesty International and Freedom House. Mr. Toure's private visit to New York and Washington, in which he has pressed the case for private investment, was somewhat marred today by an advertisement in The Washington Post, paid for by a Guinean exile group, that listed the names of several former Guinean Ambassadors to the United States and the United Nations who it says have disappeared. The advertisement said that Mr. Toure's regime ''practices tyranny and torture on a daily basis'' and that ''thousands'' have disappeared in the Camp Boiro prison. Guinean officials declined to discuss the advertisement. A State Department official said that, ''while we have expressed concern over the Sekou Toure Government's performance with regard to human rights, we have noted the progress he has made in this area.'' The State Department emphasized that Mr. Toure's visit to the United States was private, although the Guinean leader met President Reagan and Vice President Bush on Wednesday. Chase Manhattan Forum Mr. Toure is in the United States to attend a meeting of the Guinea Investment Forum, sponsored by the Chase Manhattan Bank. At his news conference, Mr. Toure described David Rockefeller, former chairman of the bank, as a ''friend.'' Although he declined to be specific on the kind of aid that Guinea needs, Mr. Toure said that he was especially interested in foreign investment to increase agricultural production. Mr. Toure, who carried on one of black Africa's longest and bitterest feuds with his capitalist neighbors, Senegal and the Ivory Coast, said that ''Africa had been cut up by colonization'' and that there was now an urgent need for unity within the continent. Mr.  Toure is expected to take over as head of the Organization of African Unity at the beginning of 1983. State Department officials said that in recent years Guinea had experienced substantial economic benefits as a result of the creation of a major bauxite mining company that is partly owned by the Government and partly by foreign investors, including the Aluminum Company of America and Martin-Marietta. Officials said that the relative success of the company, coupled with the impoverished condition of Guinea's economy, had served as a key reason for Mr. Toure's drive for more private investment."
