"Amnesty International reported yestyerday that another church in South Africa had been raided by security forces and some 70 worshipers taken into custody. The raid took place on June 16, at the Roman Catholic Church of St. Peter Claver in the black township of Duncan Village near East London, the human-rights monitoring group said, adding that none of those detained had been seen or heard from since. Reportedly, the people arrested had gone to church to pray for peace on the day on which many South Africans commemorate the deaths of black demonstrators in Soweto 10 years earlier. More than 100 people were said to have been in the church in the morning when security troops in combat attire arrived, smashed the door and asaulted people in the church with rhinoceros-hide whips. All the occupants of the church were seized, but about 30 children were later released. No clergymen were mentioned in the reports received in London as having been detained, but at least two clergymen were said to have been arrested in the days before the incident. The two were reported to be a Catholic priest and a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church Mission. Arrests Near Cape Town Earlier, the London-based human rights organization had reported the arrest of more than 200 people in a church at Elsie's River, near Cape Town, on June 15, and of more than 500 people seized at a church at Graaff-Reinet in Cape Province, on June 16. The South African Government confirmed the arrests at Elsie's River. In each case, the worshippers were said to have been observing the anniversary of the Soweto killings. The Government had banned the commemoration of the Soweto incidents under the state of emergency proclamation on June 12. The Government has not disclosed the number of detainees but said next of kin have been notified. In London, Dr. Allan Boesak, a leading foe of apartheid who is president of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches and a minister in the Cape Town area, said that conditions in South Africa were ''far, far worse than people had thought.''  'Acting Out of Sheer Panic' ''The authorities have overplayed their hand,'' Dr. Boesak said. ''They have entered a phase where they are exhausting their final options and acting out of sheer panic.'' Dr. Boesak is awaiting trial in South Africa on subversion charges and one of the terms of his bail is a ban on all discussion of economic sanctions, of calls for foreigners to divest themselves of their South African holdings, and of academic and sports segregation. ''The very fact that I cannot talk about these things shows you how panicky the South African Government has become, '' Dr. Boesak told the Ecumenical Press Service."
