"The ecstatic hero's welcome given Nelson Mandela in the U.S. should not mislead his colleagues and compatriots. It is a tribute to a man of great stamina, courage and dignity, and to a cause - but not just the cause of opposing apartheid. It is the cause of human rights, of democracy, opposing racism and repression. It was not coincidence that he was invited to the Congress on the same basis as Poland's Lech Walesa and Czechoslovakia's Vaclav Havel, symbols of the same cause in different latitudes and circumstances. That is why it is impossible to ignore Mr. Mandela's explanation of his praise for Libya's Muammar el-Qaddafi, Cuba's Fidel Castro, the P.L.O.'s Yasir Arafat. He might have something to say for each in his own country's terms; that would be Mr. Mandela's right. But he chose to honor them solely because they helped his African National Congress. Asked how he assessed their records on human rights, Mr. Mandela said he didn't have time to look into the affairs of other countries and that it didn't concern him. This is not a double standard; it is the narrowest possible single standard. On this basis, there would be no way to justify all the protests in the U.S., the sanctions mandated by Congress, the many efforts dedicated to helping South African blacks get rid of apartheid. Americans are not directly concerned with that faraway country, unless, that is, they are concerned with the principle of ending oppression and injustice. If the principle is not shared, if there is no responsibility to assert human dignity except on one's own turf, why should Americans be any more involved in judging South Africa than Mr. Mandela is in judging Libya's terrorism? It is true there is evil and persecution in many parts of the world and that Americans don't spread their attention and condemnation evenly. There is an assortment of reasons concerning ethnic ties, history and politics. Pressure on South Africa is a real example of moral choice, the culmination of a long, and often forgotten, American campaign against colonialism and inequality by law. There were no material or strategic interests to be gained, but U.S. opinion was stirred by the sheer indecency of the system and moved to let South Africa know. Mr. Mandela has acknowledged that. With his appeal not to relax sanctions, he is saying that U.S. opinion matters, though he is going rather far in claiming the right of the A.N.C., not Congress, to decide when conditions for changing U.S. law have been met. There is remarkable candor in his single-minded focus on the A.N.C.'s stand, including continued armed struggle and likely nationalization of industries. He isn't even pretending to owe the respect for victims elsewhere that he solicits for his compatriots. For that matter, he has been disappointing since his release from prison in efforts to calm the continuing murderous violence between A.N.C. supporters and followers of Chief Buthelezi in Natal. He had been in contact with the Zulu leader before his release, and aides said there was reason to expect an agreement that would bring sufficient black unity for effective negotiations with the Government. But Mr. Mandela has not used his legendary authority to bring his own people together in this way. Instead, he blames Pretoria for failing to put down continued fighting in Natal. Now, at 71, he stands at the end of long personal suffering, but the beginning of an enormous task of building new foundations for his people and his country. Americans, black and white, know how hard that is. A century and a quarter after the abolition of slavery, race remains a festering issue, often exploited. When leading black politicians criticized Representative Gus Savage, Democrat of Illinois, for an anti-Semitic primary campaign, he retorted, ''There ain't but one kind of racism - that's white racism.'' Widespread common cause was made by Jews and blacks in the civil rights campaigns a generation ago on the grounds that all bigotry, all persecution, is evil. It was effective in moving the society to change its laws. But that cooperation has largely broken down, to everyone's loss. Mr. Mandela's unwillingness to see more than the hopes of his own people in his crusade adds to the loss. Using the old ''enemy of my enemy'' as the key test for finding allies cannot help his cause within South Africa, and it does not enhance his stature outside, however compelling his personality. It is because human rights means just that, human, not some limited kind of human, that he and his supporters have won such sympathy. Mr. Mandela should reconsider his basis for judgment so as not to erode the feeling that he understands why he is a hero."
