"In an act of self-scrutiny the authors called ""a first in the annals of human rights enforcement,"" the African National Congress published an independent report today detailing torture and death in its own military camps in the years of guerrilla war against apartheid. The report named accused torturers, some of whom still hold posts in the congress's security apparatus, and said the congress should pay reparations to surviving victims. It accused two senior congress officials of complicity in human rights abuses. The report had been anticipated with intense interest as a measure of the congress's willingness to police conduct in its own ranks as the country prepares for its first democratic elections. Punishment to Be Considered Cyril Ramaphosa, the congress secretary general, said the organization's national executive committee would meet on Sunday to consider whether to punish those accused and make amends. He said the organization could fine, suspend or expel members found guilty of abuses. Last October the congress admitted that dissidents and members suspected of unproven disloyalty had been tortured in its exile camps, especially the notorious Quadro detention camp in Angola. That report stopped short of naming those suspected of abuses, on the ground that they had not been offered a chance to confront their accusers. The report issued today, which was commissioned by the congress as a follow-up, resulted from courtroom-style public hearings at a soccer stadium near Soweto, where the accused were allowed to have lawyers and witnesses were cross-examined. An Independent Inquiry After the earlier report was faulted because two of its three commissioners were prominent congress lawyers, the new three-member commission was chaired by a retired South African businessman of no known political affiliation, and included a former Massachusetts state judge and a lawyer from Zimbabwe. The commission said order in the exile camps began to break down after the 1976 black student uprising in Soweto, which brought a flood of new and younger volunteers into the guerrilla training centers of Angola, Zambia, Botswana and Tanzania. Many of the new recruits were poorly educated, impatient to fight, given to drinking and smoking marijuana. Some were secret agents sent by the South African Police. The congress gave its security department, popularly called Mbokodo from the Xhosa word meaning a grinding stone, unchecked power to investigate, judge and punish the recruits. Detention and Torture The commission found that from the late 1970's until 1991, suspected spies were imprisoned for up to eight years without any hearing, tortured to extract confessions, and beaten with sticks and wires in tortures eerily similar to those allegedly inflicted on blacks by the South African Police. In one case a prisoner was smeared with pork fat and sprinkled with red ants, the report said. In some cases, the commission said, the congress had grounds for suspecting the recruits of disloyalty. Some admitted taking part in mutinies. But the security arm made little effort to verify the charges, and punished suspects according to ""a code of brutality that nearly all deemed to be the order of the day."" The commission listed cases of prisoners who were executed by firing squads for taking part in mutinies, or were beaten to death for infractions of military discipline, or died of malaria and other illnesses in detention. No one is accused by name in any of the deaths. The two senior officials criticized by name were Joe Modise, who is head of the congress's military wing, and Jacob Zuma, the deputy secretary general. Neither was accused of personally taking part in torture. Complaint Brings Arrest The report said Mr. Modise was part of a tribunal that in 1981 improperly arrested a producer for the congress's underground radio station, whose offense was complaining about nepotism and sexual harassment within the congress. The programmer, Dumisani Khosa, was beaten until he urinated blood, then shipped to Quadro camp in Angola and held for more than three years, the commission said. Mr. Zuma, who was then head of intelligence for the congress, was criticized for a supervisory failure in the case of a man, David Mbatha, who was detained in 1988, held 10 months without trial, beaten and accused of being an enemy agent. Others accused of abuses included congress representatives in Zambia and Uganda, employees of the congress security department, and one of Nelson Mandela's bodyguards. The commission was headed by Samuel M. Motsuenyane, the retired head of a black business association, and included Margaret Burnham, a former judge of the Boston municipal court who teaches political science at the University of Massachusetts, and David M. Zamchiya, a lawyer in Zimbabwe."
