"After two decades of war and famine, political oppression and mass killings, the recipe for restoring a shattered economy under a democratic government remains elusive here. In the three years since rebel troops overthrew a Marxist regime and committed themselves to democratic rule, there have been measurable gains. The government of President Meles Zenawi has cooperated with the World Bank, devalued its currency and begun to open its markets. There is general stability and peace. Inflation is down to single digits. There are 60 registered political parties. More than 120 newspapers are registered here in the capital, including many that yearn editorially for the days of the dictator Mengistu Haile Mariam, who ruled in a campaign of terror until his overthrow by rebels. And Government officials say they remain committed to raising living standards. But Ethiopia today is still the second-poorest African country after Mozambique, stalked perpetually by famine and so divided by political dissent that some critics fear it will slip back into violence, even civil war. ""The writing is on the wall, no doubt,"" said Nebiyu Samuel, head of the Ethiopian National Democratic Party, an opposition coalition that is included in the present transitional government. ""All the factors, all the recipes are there for this country to go to pieces. The temptation is there every day for me to quit. None of us should be quitters. But the road is getting narrower and narrower."" Several thousand people died this year when rains came late and the harvest failed in the south, but by most measures this represented a kind of success. The Government and international relief agencies prevented a higher toll by rushing food to the stricken area. Yet even with good rains and successful harvests, the country will continue to require aid amounting to hundreds of thousands of tons of food a year, Western relief officials say. In this desperately poor land of 50 million, where more than half live below poverty level and an estimated 20 million are unemployed, economic hardships have always defined most Ethiopians' existence. After South Africa, Ethiopia is the second-largest recipient of United States foreign aid in sub-Saharan Africa. By May, the United States had provided more than $135 million in economic assistance this year, of which about $110 million was emergency food aid. The World Bank disbursed $325 million this year, $200 million more than in the previous year. Because of the economic restructuring, Addis Ababa has been flooded with more than a million people since 1991, most of them unemployed and with no future as farmers in the countryside. More than 20,000 street children roam the city, and their numbers are expected to soar to 40,000 by the end of 1995. In the countryside, about 60 percent of the children under 5 are malnourished, one of the highest rates in Africa. In such a context, bringing prosperity and multiparty democracy in the space of a few years is an extraordinarily difficult task. ""You can't apply Western logic to what is happening in Ethiopia,"" said one diplomat. ""The Western donors are expecting too much, too fast."" But there is dissatisfaction inside Ethiopia as well. Critics of the Government call the official tolerance of a political opposition a whitewash. They say the Government, controlled by the members of Tigrean ethnic minority in the ruling party, the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary Defense Front, has fulfilled only a few of its promises. Diplomats and Ethiopians also say the Government has become increasingly autocratic and threatening as it tries to neutralize threats to its stability, moving its loyalists into top positions in the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, the university, the state airline, banks and industry. ""We have a cultural tendency towards extremism,"" said a senior Ethiopian official. ""You can't introduce democracy by undemocratic means."" Many opposition parties have refused to take part in the country's first elections, to be held early next year. The other parties that remain in the present transitional government say they have little access to radio and television, which are controlled by the Government, and are not allowed to campaign freely in the provinces. Several parties have organized military affiliates that have fought Government troops, particularly in the east. Officials officially dismissed this opposition as unorganized ""bandit activity,"" but relief workers and diplomats say that in some instances the fighting was fierce enough that the Government used tanks. Diplomats and United Nations officials say the Government has harassed and sporadically cracked down on the opposition and the press, which sometimes publishes irresponsible reports, and more than a dozen journalists have been arrested in the last few months. Scores of political demonstrators were arrested here in September; the Government accused them of inciting a riot. ""Freedom should entail responsibility,"" said Netsannet Asfaw, the presidential spokeswoman. ""If they incite violence, religious and ethnic, they are taken to court. In the West, you accept only peaceful struggle. The same should apply here. How did governments deal with the Black Panthers or the I.R.A.?"" The political dissent is also fueled by factors beyond the Government's control. The opposition is deeply divided and many of the parties have made outrageously unrealistic demands in an effort to feed unrest. And some of the Government's moves, like giving any nationality the right to secede, have heightened ethnic tensions. Another major source of tension is land, which was nationalized during the previous regime. The current Government has said it will not permit peasants to own the land they farm because of fears that they might be tempted to sell to speculators. But Ethiopia's biggest hurdle to survival and political success is food production. The Government says it is overhauling agriculture and hopes to be self-sufficient in food in a decade, but acknowledges that is optimistic. Barely eight months ago, for instance, millions of Ethiopians were on the brink of starvation as rains and crops failed in the south. With one million metric tons of food aid, the Government managed to bring help to 6.7 million people. Now the rains have been plentiful and the fields are lush, but the country will still need 700,000 to one million metric tons of food a year. If the temperamental rains fail, the situation will be disastrous. Even with sufficient rain, food production is low because of severe land degradation, low use of fertilizers and a lack of improved seeds. Ethiopia has the lowest per hectare production of grain in the world, officials say, and after years of war and drought, many farmers no longer even have oxen to till their fields. ""We're not making any progress at all,"" said a senior Western relief official. ""The same amount is being imported as in 1984 for the famine where one million died. That's the kicker, that's the tragedy. You have a beautiful crop and you still need a million tons."" Map of Ethiopia shows the location of Addis Ababa."
