"Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d has written to the United States-backed Angolan guerrilla leader, Jonas Savimbi, seeking an explanation of charges of killings and other human rights abuses in his organization, United States officials said today. The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret Tutwiler, said Mr. Baker sent a letter over the weekend to Mr. Savimbi, who leads the Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or Unita. She refused to disclose its contents, citing the confidentiality of diplomatic correspondence. But she said ""the issue of alleged Unita human rights abuses has been a part of our ongoing dialogue with Unita officials."" ""We have called upon Unita to address these allegations, including the welfare and whereabouts of the two former Unita officials, in an open and public manner,"" she added. The Washington Post reported today that in the letter Mr. Baker warned that failure to address the charges of abuses fully could derail Angola's cease-fire and the United Nations-supervised elections scheduled for September. On Thursday Miss Tutwiler also called on Unita to explain the disappearance and reported deaths of two senior officials. The call went out after Mr. Savimbi confirmed reports that serious human rights abuses had occurred within his movement. Miss Tutwiler said then that the Administration was unable to confirm independently that the two prominent Unita officials were killed but noted ""recent reports about the deaths of these individuals appear increasingly credible."" The two men are Tito Chingunji, who was Unita's Washington representative in the mid-1980's, and Wilson dos Santos. A special Unita commission issued a report last week that said the two men had ""unaccountably disappeared."" Miss Tutwiler said at the time, ""We call upon Unita either to produce these individuals publicly or to provide a detailed explanation of the circumstances surrounding their reported disappearances."" Throughout the years that Washington backed Unita financially and politically in its efforts to overthrow the Marxist Government in Angola, there were persistent reports about human rights problems with the rebel group."
