"WHAT are the responsibilities of journalists in the coverage of human rights? ''The Media and Human Rights,'' on Channel 13 at 11 o'clock tonight, tries to provide an answer. It doesn't succceed, although, presumably, it doesn't expect to. The question has too many layers. The program - presented by the Center for Communication - brings together prominent journalists and other interested parties to discuss the coverage of human rights in South Africa, Poland and the Philippines. Ted Koppel moderates the discussion, and also poses the most interesting questions. What are the differences between South Africa and Poland? Are journalists ever used? These questions aren't resolved either, but light is shed in some corners. Thus Charlayne Hunter-Gault of the ''MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour'' says that South African press restrictions, apparently aimed at the outside world, deny news of racial unrest to white South Africans as well. Peter Swanepoel, a press officer for the South African Embassy, rebuts this. Nonetheless, Ms. Hunter-Gault has made her point: white South Africans may be poorly informed about their own country. Why do journalists not focus more on human rights violations in Poland? Aryeh Neier, vice chairman of Helsinki Watch, says there is ''an uneventful revolution in Poland.'' The revolution, though sweeping, lacks drama. Mr. Neier also says that the most important concern in the world today is human rights. A few panelists take mild issue with this. Karen Elliott House, foreign editor of The Wall Street Journal, says that human rights ''isn't the only issue.'' Charles Krauthammer of The New Republic says that the press reported on the ''tiger cages'' in South Vietnam, but neglected to examine larger symptoms of abuse in North Vietnam. Journalists, he says, may focus on abuses by only one side. Subsequently, Mr. Koppel says that he is a ''little disturbed'' by some of his colleagues; he thinks they should be more concerned about human rights than they are. If nothing else, the program, produced by Kerry Smith Marash, gives us a feeling for complications. ''The Media and Human Rights'' is not compelling television, but it does offer some sophisticated viewpoints."
