"President Milton Obote, without referring specifically to allegations that thousands of people have been killed in his country, today defended the policies of his Government and army troops. ''A lot is being said about Uganda abroad,'' Mr. Obote said in a speech in this town 180 miles west of Kampala, the capital. ''I am not worried at all.'' He added, ''Our policies are correct.'' This month Elliott Abrams, the United States Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, said in interviews and in testimony before Congress that in recent years more than 100,000 Ugandans may have been killed by the military or died of starvation in the Luwero triangle region. Many of the deaths, he said, may have been a result of ''large-scale civilian massacres, forced starvation and impeded humanitarian relief operations.'' In Congressional testimony, Mr. Abrams said that in the Lowero triangle and elsewhere, the Ugandan Army had been using ''defensive operations as an excuse for looting and for the rape or murder of innocent civilians.'' Criticism by Former Presidents  Former Presidents Yusufu K. Lule and Godfrey L. Binaisa, both of whom live abroad, have also criticized Mr. Obote's human rights record. The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Kampala, Emmanuel Cardinal Nsubuga, said in Boston this month that as many as 80,000 Ugandans were being detained in Government camps. Mr. Obote at no time referred to the substance of the allegations except to note that his critics had charged that ''people are being killed, that is their language.'' He said he would neither resign nor attend a conference with his opponents outside Uganda. Instead, he called upon his opponents abroad to challenge him in the elections to be held next year. ''I invite everyone to come home and let's have elections, free and fair elections,'' he said. He also ruled out the possibility of a negotiated settlement with an insurgent leader, Yoweri Mseveni, who, after the elections in 1980, led his followers into the bush, mounting an insurgency that has dragged on since. Mr. Mseveni charged that the elections had been rigged. 'My Master Is the People'  At no time did Mr. Obote mention Mr. Mseveni by name or say whether he would be allowed to take part in the elections if he gave up the armed rebellion. ''My master is the people, not the gunmen in the bush, and it is certainly not newssheets from outside Uganda,'' Mr. Obote said. ''It is no solution to go out into the bush and shoot people. If you give in to gunmen and those who back them you betray the trust of the people.'' Mr. Obote spoke on the occasion of the consecration of a bishop in the Church of Uganda, a denomination with links to the Church of England, here in south Ruwenzori, a mountainous region near the border with Zaire. He did not answer questions after his speech. In a veiled reference to Mr. Mseveni, the President pointed out that the newly consecrated Bishop had been elected to that office. Mr. Obote said: ''He did not go up to the mountains and say, 'Until I am a bishop, I am not coming down.' You go up to the mountain and you do not become a bishop. You remain here, you become a bishop and all of us bless you.'' Denies '80 Vote Was Rigged  Mr. Obote denies that the 1980 elections were rigged, noting that voters in the Luwero area had overwhelmingly supported the opposition Democratic Party, and not Mr. Obote's Uganda People's Congress. Before beginning his rebellion, Mr. Mseveni headed a third party that won only one parliamentary seat in 1980. Earlier Mr. Mseveni had been an ally of Mr. Obote and a member of the Uganda People's Congress. The Democratic Party is a legal political opposition that claims no ties to Mr. Mseveni or his National Resistance Army. ''I don't support violence,'' Paul Ssemogerere, the leader of the Democratic Party, said in an interview Friday. ''But I can see how it may seem reasonable from the point of view of Realpolitik.'' Mr. Ssemogerere has also charged that the 1980 election results were falsified. Mr. Obote implied it was Mr. Mseveni's inability to come to power through elections that had led him to try to overthrow the Government through violence. 'They Fear the Ballot'  ''Many leaders in Uganda fear the people,'' he said. ''Consequently they fear the ballot.'' Mr. Obote, 59 years old, was President from 1966 to 1971, when he was overthrown by Idi Amin. Mr. Obote then went into exile in Tanzania."
