"An outspoken critic of human rights abuses under President Milton Obote was named Minister of Internal Affairs today by the military Government that ousted Mr. Obote last month. The appointment of the minister, Paul Ssemogerere, head of the main opposition party, was viewed by some commentators here as an attempt by the new Government to improve the dismal human rights record that has long tormented Uganda. Mr. Obote's rule had been marked by detentions of political opponents without official charge or trial and the reported murders of tens of thousands of men, women and children by the army. Mr. Ssemogerere, head of the Democratic Party, had blamed the ministry that he will now oversee for much of the situation. The ministry controls the police and the prisons. There were unconfirmed reports that he might immediately release political prisoners, some of whom are top members of his party. Defense Minister Chosen The ruling military council also appointed its vice chairman, Gard Wilson Toko as Defense Minister. Mr. Toko, a retired air force colonel, is general manager of Uganda Air Lines. His appointment surprised several people here, who expected the post to be offered to Yoweri Museveni, the rebel leader whom the council has been urging to join the new Government. The two men are the first Cabinet members named as the new Government begins to shape its administration. The appointments were announced after the military council met with leaders of the country's fractious political parties, whom the head of state, Lieut. Gen. Tito Okello, urged to practice ''clean politics and not the politics of tribalism and killing.'' Several people knowledgeable about Ugandan politics said it appeared that the military rulers, most of whom are members of the Acholi tribe that dominates the army, were so far trying to carry out their promise to form a broad-based Government. Early on, the council leaders appointed Paulo Muwanga, a former close aide to Mr. Obote, as Prime Minister. He is a member of the Baganda tribe, the largest tribe in the country and one that has given strong support to the Democratic Party and Mr. Museveni's insurgents. Two Attacks Reported However, highly placed diplomatic sources here say there have been two attempts to kill Mr. Muwanga at his home since his appointment. The new leaders plan to meet Mr. Museveni on Aug. 12 in Bungoma, Kenya, near the Ugandan border. Mr. Museveni, who led a four-year bush war against Mr. Obote and whose support for the new Government is viewed as crucial, has been living in Sweden but was last reported to be in Tanzania. Also today, Entebbe Airport, which serves this capital city, reopened for the first time since the coup July 27. The former President's home just northeast of the city's center was in shambles, stripped by looters. According to the soldiers who allowed visitors into the home today, and to a next-door neighbor and independent military sources, Mr. Obote, a member of the Langi tribe, escaped from the house just minutes after the coup leaders captured the Uganda radio station. He left a force of security guards, they said, many of whom were killed in a shoot-out with soldiers supporting the takeover. General Okello has said his military forces killed no one during the coup. The sources said some of the guards who escaped came back later and rounded up about 12 people with Acholi names and murdered them in a tin shack within Mr. Obote's compound. Today, the floor of the shack was little more than a carpet of dried blood, strewn with a few boots and dozens of rounds of spent shells. The sides of the building were punctured with bullet holes."
