"France, moving to protest the crackdown on dissent in South Africa, announced today that it had suspended new investment in that country and recalled its Ambassador. The measures, announced by Prime Minister Laurent Fabius, were the most serious taken against South Africa by a Western country since a state of emergency went into effect at midnight Saturday. [In Johannesburg, the authorities criticized political opponents, including two leading clerics. They also announced that 665 people had been detained since the state of emergency was declared. Page A6.] On Tuesday, the British Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe, called on South Africa to end the state of emergency and to free unconditionally the black nationalist leader Nelson Mandela and other political prisoners. $1.6 Billion in Investments French investment in South Africa amounts to about $1.6 billion. To supply its nuclear generators, France buys about 25 percent of its uranium from South Africa. The country is France's most important source of imported coal and the biggest market for France's electronic industry. South Africa's first nuclear generating plant was built in the early 1980's by a consortium of French companies. In May the Socialist Government reversed a longstanding French policy opposing economic sanctions against South Africa. At the time, Mr. Fabius said investment in South Africa would be cut within 18 months unless basic respect for human rights improved markedly. The action today moved up that timetable by nearly 16 months. In his statement today, the Prime Minister said: ''For all people who support justice and the rights of man, the apartheid regime in South Africa is inadmissible. It institutionalizes racial discrimination; it undermines the moral and political principles on which our society is based. ''Events of the last few days have shown a grave and serious deterioration. By installing the state of emergency, and conferring full powers on the army and police, in multiplying arbitrary arrests, and in giving the order to fire on the population, the South African Government has only reinforced its repression.'' The Government's unexpected measures suspending new investment and recalling the Ambassador, Pierre Boyer, may have been prompted in part by growing pressure here to take sterner action than other Western countries. Le Monde published a scornful cartoon criticizing what it saw as an equivocal stand by the United States and warned in an editorial that ''the moment has without doubt come to step up the pressure on the leaders in Pretoria so that they take action - before it is too late.'' An hour before Mr. Fabius's announcement, Claude Estier, president of the Foreign Affairs Commission of the National Assembly, called on the Government to devise ''concrete measures to express France's abhorrence of the methods being used by the South African leaders.'' ''Faced with such glaring abrogations of fundamental human rights,'' Mr. Estier said, ''it's no longer possible to take refuge in verbal protestations.'' Georges Marchais, secretary general of the French Communist Party, in a letter to President Francois Mitterrand made public today, called for a break in all economic and cultural contacts between the two countries and bans on imports from South Africa and on purchases of uranium from South-West Africa, ''a country illegally occupied by the Pretoria regime.''"
