"South Africa's agony has become America's living-room theater. Intensive television coverage has made the principal actors, white, black and brown, comprehensible. And it has underlined the message of prior press reports: the bafflement of a lost white tribe that cannot understand why Americans are so aroused. South Africa's leaders deserve a hearing, and an answer. Look at our country, pleads the Afrikaners' President, P.W. Botha. It has problems, but a prosperous white minority has spread economic benefits to 21 million blacks, the healthiest and best paid in all Africa. Why kill this goose? Racial injustice exists, he concedes. ''Urban'' blacks deserve some political rights, and further ''reforms'' are needed in the apartheid system that treats the majority of blacks as citizens not of South Africa but of tribal ''homelands.'' Just give us time, he asks. Yet Mr. Botha's nationalist regime cannot say how much time because it does not say and probably no longer knows where it is going. It deals politically only with blacks who accept the apartheid framework or won't press too vigorously against it. It deals no less harshly than it did a generation ago with blacks who ask to be consulted before their fate is decided. It muzzles them. It bans them. It shoots them. Mr. Botha grieves for the victims, vows to uphold law and order and blames radicals for provoking bloodshed. But that will no longer do, precisely because South Africa's black majority is better fed and increasingly better led. It is learning that its labor is vital to the whites' vaunted prosperity and that every promise of reforms reeks of paternalism.  Nor can the killings of unarmed demonstrators and the other outrages of institutional racism be mitigated by pointing to misgovernment in black- run African nations. Mr. Botha is the first to ask that Afrikaners be judged for what they are - a proud, devout people of European origin whose forebears settled in South Africa before the American Revolution. Their claim to a common kinship with the West is what sharpens the very condemnation that Mr. Botha deplores. Racism is not unique to South Africa, and no Western society is without sin. But after every allowance is made, South Africa remains the only country claiming Western values whose political system dishonors them and whose Government stands forthrightly on the side of racist repression. Betraying the religious tenets underlying Western culture, it has made race the touchstone of political rights. And even now its leaders seek not to unite with the black majority but to expel it from South Africa to the specious tribal homelands. How Americans might best help rescue this ''Western'' outpost from calamity is a hard question. But judging the essence of South Africa's present system is not hard. Secretary of State Shultz used the right words the other day in reacting to the Uitenhage killings. They are repugnant, and the system that produced them is evil. With a forbearing President in the White House, the prodigal white tribe has had every chance to make its case to Americans. It needs now to listen."
