"Nearly 3,000 people have been detained in the first week of South Africa's state of emergency, officials of the World Council of Churches said yesterday. Relying on sources in South Africa, the council and Amnesty International, the human rights group, are compiling lists of detainees. South African press restrictions imposed last Thursday in the latest nationwide emergency decree forbid journalists in South Africa to report the names of those detained. ''It appears that the arrests have been continuing steadily,'' David Laulicht, a spokesman for Amnesty, said in a telephone interview from London. Can Be Held Incommunicado During the state of emergency, the police have the right to hold prisoners incommunicado and are given immunity for their acts. ''To Amnesty, this seems to be a license to torture,'' Mr. Laulicht said. During a state of emergency last year, many detainees complained of torture. Risking arrest under the state of emergency, Bishop Desmond M. Tutu urged the West yesterday to impose sanctions against his Government. In an interview with ABC News, he called President Reagan an ''accomplice after the fact'' in Pretoria's racist policies. [Page A9.] Four of five Americans caught in the roundups had been released by late yesterday, State Department officials said. The officials said they did not know if any of the Americans were maltreated in jail. The four who have been released are: Rodney Williams, 51 years old, of Hawaii; Brad Daugherty, 18, of San Diego; Ronald Minor, 31, of Anaheim, California, and the Rev. Brian Burchfield, who lives in South Africa. The name of the fifth American, who is still in jail, could not be made public, State Department officials said, because of the American Privacy Act. In Washington yesterday, Bernard Kalb, the State Department spokesman, said: ''The United States deplores the strict regulation on press activities in South Africa. The U.S. regards freedom of the press as an essential feature of democracy. And it's the U.S. hope that the South African Government will soon realize that it is not the press reporting of the problems in South Africa, but the problems themselves that South Africa must deal with.'' He said reports from American diplomats ''corroborate an earlier U.S. estimate that the stayaway on Monday by black South Africans was massive'' and that ''most returned to work on Tuesday.'' Other officials said it was not possible for American Embassy officers to be able to provide any credible running count of daily acts of violence in a country as big as South Africa. Clergy and Doctors Detained The South African detainees include clergymen, union leaders, community organizers, lawyers who have defended political prisoners and doctors who have treated victims of police violence, the Rev. Joan Campbell, executive director of the United States office of the World Council of Churches, said yesterday. Officials at the council's hedquarters in Geneva issued a statement yesterday estimating the number of detainees at 3,000 and appealing for help in identifying them. In Washington, Bishop James Malone, president of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops, urged the United States Government to ''use all means available'' and ''to exert all possible pressure'' on South Africa's leaders to release the detainees and end apartheid. Yesterday Herbert Beukes, South Africa's Ambassador to the United States, said on the NBC News program ''Today'' that the crackdown was a tactic ''to get us to a place where white and black can actually get together into a negotiating situation where we can talk about a genuine form of power-sharing.'' In London officials of Britain's Trade Union Congress said they had a list of 47 prominent South African unionists who had been jailed. #2 Union Leaders Held Among the detained were Jay Naidoo, leader of the Council of South African Trade Unions, which says it has half a million members, and Phiroshaw Camay, general secretary of the Council of Unions of South Africa, the British unionists said. The British Foreign Office estimated yesterday that 2,000 people had been detained in South Africa. In telephone interviews from New York, several South African reporters and political figures declined to comment because they said their telephones were tapped and the new restrictions prohibited giving information on the crackdown to journalists. ''I cannot divulge any information about what is happening in different regions in the country,'' said the Rev. Beyers Naude, general secretary of the South African Council of Churches. Percy Qoboza, editor of The City Press, South Africa's largest black newspaper, said yesterday, ''What the Bureau for Information tells us bears little resemblance to what we see with our own eyes, but we are prohibited by law from reporting it.'' According to sources in New York and South Africa, a church center in Soweto that had served as a major focal point for anti-apartheid protest was firebombed and heavily damaged on Tuesday morning. The church, St. Paul's Anglican Church and Conference Center, is in Bishop Tutu's diocese. Bishop Tutu is the Archbishop-elect of Cape Town. William Johnston, president of an American group, Episcopal Churchpeople for a Free Southern Africa, said he learned yesterday of the bombing in telephone conversations with friends in South Africa. Bombing of Church Reported In a separate telephone interview, a South African journalist who asked to remain anonoymous said he had heard a report that a ''Soweto church was petrol-bombed.'' He said was unable to confirm the report because the police had barred him from entering the black township. In a another report, Michael Fleshman, another member of the Episcopal group, said preliminary figures he had obtained from South Africa indicated widespread compliance with the work stoppage Monday. ''It was apparently larger than the May 1 stayaway, which involved 1.5 million workers,'' Mr. Fleshman said. He based his evaluation on figures obtained by telephone from the Labor Monitoring Group, a South African university group coordinated by Eddie Webster, a sociology professor at the University of the Witwatersrand. According to the group, 90 percent of black workers in industry and commerce in the Johannesburg region stayed away from work. But ''less than 10 percent'' of the black miners in the region complied with the strike call. #99.9% of Workers Stayed Home In the Eastern Cape, an area of heavy automobile manufacturing, 99.9 percent of African industrial workers stayed home, the group said. In the Western Cape, the figure was 90 percent. Adherence among people of mixed race was varied, with 30 percent staying away in Johannesburg and 60 percent staying away in the Western Cape. Ameen Akhalwaya, a resident of Lenasia, an Asian area adjacent to Soweto, said in a telephone interview yesterday, ''Every single business, store, restaurant, hotel, cinema, theater and bank was closed on Monday.''"
