"GEORGE P. SHULTZ leaves this week on an eight-day trip to six African countries that are rarely visited by American secretaries of state. As he flies from Senegal to Cameroon, across the continent to Kenya, and back to Nigeria, the Ivory Coast and Liberia, Mr. Shultz's main themes are likely to be economic ideology and anti-Soviet strategy, State Department officials said. Mr. Shultz wants to reinforce the trend toward free market economies and cement ties as a bulwark against Soviet influence. Other likely topics include Libya's support for terrorism and attacks in Chad, drug trafficking in Nigeria, and human rights in Kenya and Liberia. Mr. Shultz is the first secretary of state to visit sub-Saharan Africa since Cyrus R. Vance accompanied President Carter in 1978. Henry A. Kissinger was there in 1976 and William P. Rogers in 1970. Once a major departure point for Africans being taken into slavery in America, Senegal now maintains close diplomatic and economic ties with the United States, providing the alternative landing site for the space shuttle and space tracking stations. It received $47 million in American aid last year, much of it geared to invigorating private enterprise. Dakar, the colonial headquarters of French West Africa, still has the atmosphere of a French provincial town. Senegal became independent in 1960, with Leopold Sedar Senghor, the poet and statesman, as President. He retired in 1981 and was succeeded by Abdou Diouf, who was elected to a five-year term in 1983. Originally a haven for freed American slaves (hence the name), Liberia has close cultural, linguistic and monetary ties with the United States. But the relationship has been troubled since the 1980 coup in which Samuel K. Doe, an army sergeant, took power and established the first Government of Liberians who were not descendants of the 19th century settlers. When it imposed martial law and made political arrests, Liberia came under pressure from Washington to improve its human rights record, and the delivery of some American aid was delayed. More recently, about $10 million has been held up for several months in an effort to induce Liberia to undertake economic reforms. A major economic success story, the Ivory Coast is the base for much of American business in western Africa. The influence of France, its former colonial ruler, is very much in evidence, especially in Abidjan, the modern capital, which has far more French residents now than at the time of independence in 1960. The Ivory Coast also maintains close ties with the front-line states of southern Africa, and Washington looks to President Felix Houphouet-Boigny as a respected authority on issues involving the white Government in South Africa. These are expected to be major points of discussion during Secretary Shultz's visit. Mr. Houphouet-Boigny has been chief of state since independence. Popular with British colonial settlers because of its climate, and now a tourist attraction for its mountains and wild game parks, Kenya has more than 20 million people, the fastest-growing population in the world, the State Department estimates. The resulting severe economic problems are expected to get attention during Secretary Shultz's visit. The Government of President Daniel arap Moi has been arresting political dissidents in recent months, provoking quiet expressions of official concern from Washington. Kenya is receiving $43 million in American aid this year. It is one of the few places bordering the Indian Ocean where United States Navy ships can put into port for liberty. With a Government that is Western-leaning, Cameroon enjoys substantial investment by American companies, including banks and oil companies, and has about 1,000 students in the United States. Its Atlantic coast is on a vital supply route for landlocked Chad, which is fighting off Libyan troops. The Peace Corps has had a large program in Cameroon since 1962, and the country is receiving $20 million in aid this year. A German colony before World War I, it was divided into French and British sectors under League of Nations mandates, later becoming United Nations trusteeships. French Cameroons became independent in 1960; the rest was split with Nigeria after plebiscites in 1961. Paul Biya is President. With more than 100 million people, one-fourth of black Africa's population and extensive oil reserves, Nigeria carries significant diplomatic and economic weight. Major topics of discussion during Secretary Shultz's visit are expected to be the Reagan Administration's stand on South Africa, joint American-Nigerian efforts to block one of the international routes for heroin bound for the United States, and the recent Nigerian ban on imports of American wheat, valued at $225 million in 1985. Although Nigeria is the fifth-largest source of imported oil for the United States, economic problems have forced the Government of Maj. Gen. Ibrahim Babangida to adopt austerity measures."
