"To the Editor: Holly Burkhalter should be commended for drawing attention to the sharp deterioration in the human rights situation in Somalia (Op-Ed, Aug. 13). She is incorrect, however, when she states that ''the Bush Administration's response has been to try to shore up the faltering regime.'' The United States has strongly protested the latest human rights violations in Somalia, asked for an investigation and insisted that those responsible be brought to justice. Ms. Burkhalter was briefed on what we are doing by our Ambassador to Somalia and the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs before her article appeared. We're surprised her description is so wide of the mark. The Administration's request to obligate $21 million in economic support funds for Somalia was directly tied to our support for economic reforms in that country. These reforms, worked out with the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, are designed to transfer economic decison-making power from the Government to the people and the marketplace - to support the very people who are suffering both from poverty and from human rights abuses. The I.M.F. is not lending to Somalia, and we doubt that the commercial banks are providing much either. The lending programs that exist - those of the World Bank, the African Development Bank and United States economic assistance - emphasize health, education and agricultural projects designed to raise the incomes and living standards of one of the world's poorest peoples. The serious human rights violations in Mogadishu, however, compel us to give careful scrutiny to assistance to Somalia. The events of last month are especially regrettable since there were signs over the last year that the Somali Government was improving its human rights practices and seeking reconciliation with dissident groups. The United States is waiting to see specific actions that would improve respect for human rights and return to the path of national reconciliation. The Somali Government is in no doubt that unless these abuses stop and an investigation into the recent outrages takes place, there will be no hope for rectifying its international image or our Governments' relationship. RICHARD SCHIFTER Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs   Washington, Aug. 18, 1989"
