"A lawyer who investigated allegations of Government death squads was killed when a bomb exploded in headphones of a tape recorder he received in the mail, the police and his law firm said today. The lawyer, Bheki Mlangeni, 32 years old, died on Friday night at his home in Soweto, Capt. Ruben Bloomberg of the police said. Mr. Mlangeni put a cassette tape in the recorder and pressed the play button, and the device exploded, the captain said. Statements by Mr. Mlangeni's law firm and a private group he worked with said the bomb was in headphonesthat came with the tape recorder. No other casualties were reported. Mr. Mlangeni worked for a private law firm and was a member of the African National Congress. He also had worked with the private Board of Inquiry into Informal Repression, which investigated assertions of Government death squads operating against anti-apartheid campaigners. The board submitted information to a Government-appointed judicial commission, which investigated assertions that the police and a secret military unit called the Civilian Cooperation Bureau sent out death squads. The judicial commission concludedthat some police and military figures had attacked anti-apartheid figures, but that there was no evidence of death squads operated by the Government. In a statement issued today, the informal repression board said the package containing the tape recorder originally had been mailed from Johannesburg in May 1990 to a ""D. J. Coetzee"" in Lusaka, Zambia. The return address said ""Bheki,"" with the law firm's name and address, the statement said. The package apparently was never delivered in Zambia and returned to the law firm Thursday, the statement said. It contained the tape recorder,headphones and a tape labeled ""Evidence of Hit Squads,"" the board statement said. ""D. J. Coetzee"" appeared to be the former police officer Dirk Coetzee, who testified before the judicial commission that he took part in police death squads, the statement said. It also said Mr. Mlangeni had been in frequent contact with Mr. Coetzee before the date the package was mailed. Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok condemned the attack and said the police would do everything in their power to solve the case. The congress, human-rights groups and legal organizations also condemned the killing and asserted death-squad involvement. Pretoria has denied operating death squads and says it has disbanded the Civilian Cooperation Bureau."
