"This spring the United Nations is sending the Vice President of Burundi's Supreme Court on a four-week course to study human rights and is also sending a team of French-speaking police officers to help train Togo's police force. The United Nations also recently published a report listing 28 nations accused of carrying out summary executions last year and another charting religious persecution around the world. The training programs and the reports are part of a new carrot-and-stick approach the United Nations is adopting toward one of its less well-known tasks - that of encouraging governments to respect the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. That landmark definition of mankind's inalienable rights and freedoms was adopted unanimously by the nations of the world four decades ago this year. The carrot takes the form of a new campaign to provide practical assistance to countries eager to improve their human rights record. This assistance can range from teaching magistrates, law enforcement officers and prison staff their obligations under the human rights code to founding law schools and libraries and checking that a country's legislation complies with the Universal Declaration. Shame Is the Only Stick ''We aim to build an infrastructure of customs and institutions that encourage respect for human rights,'' said Jan Martenson, the United Nations Under Secretary General for Human Rights, who directs the new programs from Geneva. The only enforcement stick the United Nations carries is the ability to shame governments that abuse their citizens' human rights by publicizing the misdeeds. But the organization is now trying to make this more effective by issuing a new series of ''thematic reports'' surveying the frequency of particular kinds of rights abuse and listing the guilty countries. Besides chronicling summary executions and religious intolerance, the United Nations has also now started publishing regular annual reports on political disappearances and the use of cruel and degrading punishments. Burma, Guatemala, Iran, Israel and Uganda are among nations accused of conducting summary executions last year and not replying to United Nations inquiries. Bulgaria, Burundi, Iran, Pakistan, Turkey and the Soviet Union are suspected of intolerance of religious minorities, and the Governments of Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala and Peru are among those believed to have had a hand in the disappearance of 261 people in 14 countries last year, according to the United Nations. Since 1961, when the General Assembly adopted two binding treaties defining citizens' human rights, the United Nations has been charged with encouraging and monitoring compliance. Every year the United Nation's human rights subcommission, an independent body of experts, hears complaints from individuals and rights organizations like Amnesty International against oppressive governments and tries to mediate in confidence. This year it settled complaints against Iraq, Pakistan and Grenada. Six-Week Hearing Held More recalcitrant human rights abusers are dealt with by the full Human Rights Commission, made up of 43 government representatives, at the six-week public hearing it holds in Geneva every year. But the commission is highly political and sparing in the use it makes of the only sanction it has - the right to order an inquiry by a special investigator who reports publicly to its next meeting. Iran, Afghanistan, Chile, Guatemala and El Salvador are now under investigation for rights abuses. Among those investigated in the past were Israel, South Africa and Poland after it imposed martial law."
