"Human rights groups monitoring detentions in South Africa have compiled a list of 390 names of children being detained under the emergency decree. Four on the list are 11 years old, and several are 12 or 13. The document lists only a small proportion of the estimated 8,800 young people detained since June 12. Most of the children identified are said to come from black townships outside Johannesburg and Pretoria. ''Children are constantly being picked up, beaten and some released, but the number of young detainees is probably growing, although only Pretoria knows for certain,'' says William Johnston, director of the Episcopal Churchpeople for a Free Southern Africa, which is distributing the list of ''children under repression.'' The New York-based human rights organization has begun a Christmas campaign in the United States to support the movement led by the Detainees' Parents' Support Committee in South Africa. Asked to Write Botha It is asking Americans to select the name of a young detainee and write to President P. W. Botha urging the child's immediate release, with copies to Secretary of State George P. Shultz and their representative in Congress. ''The churches are very concerned about the reported arrest and torture of children and will be pressing for more sanctions against the South African Government,'' Willis Logan, Africa Office Director of the National Council of Churches, said yesterday. Mr. Logan said he had received a copy of a circular letter sent this week by the Rev. Beyers Naude, general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, to member churches calling for ''united action'' in the spirit of Christmas. Earlier this month, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights updated its report ''The War Against Children,'' declaring: ''Under the 1986 emergency, abuses against children have continued unabated; children are still the special target of the security forces and remain at risk of death, injury, arrest, detention and physical assaults.'' A survey by the Detainees' Parents' Support Committee found that 3,000 of the children detained since June 12 were 14 years or younger, according to the Lawyers Committee report. It cites many cases of children subjected to electric shocks and other forms of ill treatment by the police. Beating Is Reported For example, a 12-year-old named Amos from Daveyton disappeared on July 17. His parents found him in the hospital, where he said he had been shot in the ankle by policemen while standing on the street and then ''assaulted with fists, whips and kicks'' in the police station. His parents were told he is being held under emergency regulations, and on Oct. 13 they were refused permission to visit him. The assault and torture of detainees, including children, in 1986 is documented in the report by affidavits, medical reports and court applications. For instance, on Sept. 12, an urgent court application was brought on behalf of 14 children and 10 adults in Westville Prison, all of whom charged they had been assaulted by the police. The Durban Supreme Court granted the order in early October, by which time two of the children had been in detention for almost four months and the others about two months. ''It is a fact that child detainees are not treated any differently from adult detainees,'' Audrey Coleman of the Detainees Parents Support Committee said at the Conference on Children in Stockholm last month. ''They have no rights to visits from parents, lawyers or independent doctors. Some report that they are held with adult detainees. Some are exposed to the harsh and brutal action of common law criminals.'' Ms. Coleman, who was served a banning order on her return to South Africa, also told the conference of attacks by private vigilante groups and mysterious assault squads. She cited the case of a 15-year-old student leader picked up at his home a few weeks ago by plainclothesmen saying they were policemen. The next day relatives went to the police station, but the boy was not there. Eventually they found him shot and stabbed to death in a mortuary."
