"To the Editor: President Bush's decision to lift South African sanctions (front page, July 11) ignores compelling evidence that the South African Government is pursuing a double agenda -- freeing Nelson Mandela, unbanning the anti-apartheid opposition and dismantling much of apartheid's legal structure, but at the same time orchestrating violence against its chief rival, the African National Congress. While Americans want to believe that the South African Government is unequivocally ending apartheid, the following evidence of government-sponsored violence should not have been ignored. Africa Watch, the American human-rights organization, finds that during last year's township conflicts in Natal between the A.N.C. and Inkatha, South African security forces repeatedly joined with Inkatha against the A.N.C., and transported Inkatha vigilantes in police vehicles, standing by while Inkatha attacked, and intervening only to stop A.N.C. supporters from defending themselves. Almost without exception, independent journalists report similar security force support for anti-A.N.C. violence this year in the Transvaal. Lawyers for Human Rights, a respected South African human-rights group, has documented that former South African military officers are using black surrogates to attack the A.N.C. from the Ciskei homeland in the Eastern Cape. The anti-apartheid newspaper New Nation reports similar activities in the Gazankulu homeland in the far northern Transvaal. A former South African intelligence officer, Maj. Nico Basson, has described a secret government operation to supply AK-47 submachine guns to Inkatha and to organize attacks on the A.N.C. According to Mr. Basson, South African security forces use black surrogates, such as Inkatha and other vigilante groups, to create the false impression that attacks on the A.N.C. are so-called ""black on black violence,"" rather than planned and coordinated by security forces. Undercover police have assassinated dozens of anti-apartheid activists, according to a former South African police captain, Dirk Coetzee. The Afrikaans language newspaper Vrye Weekblad printed Mr. Coetzee's allegations that a senior police official, Gen. Lothar Neethling, prepared poisons for government opponents. After General Neethling sued the newspaper for libel, a South African judge pronounced him a liar for denying the allegations and pronounced Mr. Coetzee a truthful witness. A few months later, a sophisticated letter bomb addressed to Mr. Coetzee exploded and killed a South African human-rights lawyer. Africa Watch has concluded that the evidence fully warrants ""findings that death squads have been supported by both the South African police and the South African Defense Force."" President F. W. de Klerk resists an independent investigation of the security forces, preferring that inquiries be supervised by National Party loyalists. Defense Minister Magnus Malan and International Security Minister Adrian Vlok deny that security forces have acted improperly. While rogue units in the South African security establishment could be responsible for anti-A.N.C. violence, it is difficult to believe this occurs without the knowledge of Mr. de Klerk, Mr. Malan or Mr. Vlok. Among conditions imposed for lifting sanctions by the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act are that the South African Government permit free exercise of political activity and negotiate in good faith for a new constitution. The inaction and defensiveness of South Africa's three most powerful government officials on security force violence raises a serious question about compliance. Can a government that condones security force violence, including death squads, against its chief political opposition be said to permit free exercise of political activity or to negotiate in good faith. STEPHEN B. COHEN Washington, July 11, 1991 The writer, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for human rights, is a professor at Georgetown University Law Center."
