"To the Editor: The Times recently published advertisements by the Togolese Government and the Mouvement Togolais pour la Democratie regarding human rights in Togo and a letter to the editor signed by the chairman and executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A.  commenting upon these advertisements. To one who has followed events in this tiny West African nation for some time, the actions of Togo's ruler, Etienne Gnassingbe Eyadema, are frighteningly reminiscent of the path taken by Uganda's deposed dictator, Idi Amin. In 1963, Mr. Eyadema led independent Africa's first coup by organizing a band of noncoms, formerly paid by the French Government, who were disgruntled because the first President of Togo saw no purpose in maintaining a costly standing army. That President, Sylvanus Olympio, had throughout the 1950's appeared year after year before the U.N. Trusteeship Council to argue the cause of Togolese independence. Mr. Olympio's eloquence, breadth of vision and cosmopolitan sensibility are remembered by those who had the privilege of knowing him. It is this distinguished gentleman whom, according to eyewitness and press accounts of the time, Mr.  Eyadema shot in cold blood. The sequence of political events following the assassination will be of little interest to your readers at large. Suffice to say that Mr. Eyadema was unable to consolidate his control in 1963, staged a second coup in 1967 and installed himself as President. Mr. Eyadema's first actions after the 1967 coup were to abolish the constitution and dissolve parliament. He has ruled Togo as his private fiefdom since then. The darker side of Mr. Eyadema's rule has been revealed in 1980 reports of Amnesty International, the U.S. State Department and Freedom House. They refer to torture, jailings and other acts violative of civil and human rights that one had hoped had disappeared with the departure of Idi Amin. Since his accession to power, Mr. Eyadema, in the name of national prestige, has squandered Togo's meager resources, which were so carefully marshaled by his predecessors. Today's visitor to Togo's capital, Lome, will find empty high-rise hotels and a steel mill and oil refinery lacking raw materials - all situated on a coast line whose 30 miles of tree-lined beaches have been gobbled up by Government-sponsored industrialization. The visitor will also find a nation so burdened with debt that funds are no longer available to invest in projects and programs to achieve the fundamental goals of educating and nourishing the populace, while costly jet fighters take to the skies above a territory whose widest dimension is 70 miles. The Togolese people have had a long and pragmatic relationship with the industrialized world. One can still find Togolese who speak a smattering of German and Portuguese and who are fluent in French and English. More importantly, the 20-odd ethnic groups that make up this country have had to get along among themselves for centuries with different tongues and variegated cultures. Fortunately, it is unlikely that such a people can long be seduced by the egomania of their present leadership. When the quest for glory is abandoned and the debts are finally paid (or forgiven), Togo can resume its economic and political development. STANLEY T. STAIRS, New York, Sept. 19, 1980 The writer is an international lawyer."
