"If South Africa's President, P.W. Botha, truly means to scrap rather than rename the hateful pass laws, it will be time to remove the quotation marks from his current series of ''reforms.'' He has stopped enforcement of the laws, one of the most degrading features of apartheid. But real cheering must wait a few more days until he defines a new, universal identity system. If that allows blacks to live and work where they choose, a new era may indeed be at hand. The cruelty of the pass laws is not in dispute. All South African blacks over age 15 - and only blacks - have been required to carry identity books showing where they may live and work. More than 200,000 were arrested in 1984 for violating what the regime calls ''influx controls.'' Those convicted by special courts have been among the worst-treated prisoners. According to an Amnesty International report, beatings have been routine and long-term prisoners have been ''rented'' or ''sold'' as peons to white farmers. The purpose of this blatantly racist system was expounded in 1922 when a Government commission endorsed already-existing pass laws: ''The native should only be allowed to enter urban areas, which are essentially the white man's creation, when he is willing to enter and minister to the needs of the white man, and should depart therefrom when he ceases to so minister.'' When Mr. Botha's National Party took power in 1948, the pass books became a potent instrument for discouraging the movement of blacks from tribal ''homelands'' to cities. Yet gradually, the labor requirements of the white-run economy subverted this centerpiece of apartheid, as was glumly acknowledged last year by the President's Committee on Black Urbanization. It conceded that pass laws violated human rights and were also a practical failure. It urged adoption of a ''common identity document'' for all races, pointedly adding: ''Care should be taken that a new type of technical offense is not created in this way.'' Mr. Botha has now adopted the committee's proposal to scrap the old pass laws. He has not yet revealed whether new identity documents will be turned to the same purpose. That is what happened in Namibia, the vast territory illegally controlled by South Africa, after its pass laws were repealed in 1977. Pass books were replaced by a new card also highlighting ethnic identity, which the police continue to use to limit the movement of blacks. South Africa's Government has more than once responded to an outpouring of protest at home and abroad by pronouncing apartheid dead. But its reforms to date have been at the margin of this hateful system, promising little relief from discrimination and no progress in genuine power sharing. The release of all pass-law violators, if followed by the law's genuine rescission, could mark the beginning of an overdue social revolution. In welcoming the demise of the pass books, Bishop Desmond Tutu spoke from sad experience in adding the necessary caveat: ''I hope there is not a sting in the tail.''"
