"The Reagan Administration called today on the Government of South Africa to make ''bold decisions'' to end racial violence and to give ''political rights, justice and equality'' to the country's black majority. The statement was issued by the White House and the State Department as thousands of demonstrators marched to the State Department, demanding an end to South Africa's system of racial segregation. They also demanded changes in United States policy, including imposition of economic sanctions on South Africa. The police estimated that 5,500 people joined the march from the Lincoln Memorial to the State Department. They chanted, ''Freedom yes, apartheid no!'' and they carried black cardboard coffins in memory of people killed in South Africa in the last 11 months of unrest. Among those who joined the protest were Mayor Koch of New York and a half-dozen other mayors, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, the actor Paul Newman and the civil rights activist Coretta Scott King. The police reported no arrests. U.S. Asks End to Repression Charles E. Redman, a State Department spokesman, said the United States had firm views on what steps were needed in South Africa. ''They include an end to violence and repression,'' he said, ''a restoration of order, and negotiations between the Government and black South Africa's leaders which will produce political rights, justice and equality for that country's black majority, leading to an end to apartheid.'' ''The situation in South Africa is clearly very serious,'' Mr. Redman said. ''It is a time for bold decisions, and it is a time for those who believe in peace to reason together, agree on and build a better future for South Africa.'' Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, read a nearly identical statement to reporters in Santa Barbara, Calif., near the mountain ranch where President Reagan has gone for a 23-day vacation. McFarlane Warns Botha At a meeting in Vienna last Thursday, Robert C. McFarlane, President Reagan's national security adviser, urged South African officials, including Foreign Minister Roelof F. Botha, to make changes in apartheid. He also warned that an ''emotional climate'' in this country could harden American policy toward South Africa. The Reagan Administration has opposed economic sanctions as counterproductive, but Congress has come close to imposing such measures on the white minority Government. Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, met last week with Secretary of State George P. Shultz and recommended that President Reagan ''take action'' to address the problem of apartheid. At a rally outside the State Department today, the Rev. John T. Walker, Episcopal Bishop of Washington and dean of the Washington Cathedral, denounced apartheid, saying it ''destroys human dignity and sets race against race and religious community against religious community.'' 'Dreadful Evil,' Bishop Says He prayed that people around the world would keep working and fighting ''until this dreadful evil is removed from the earth.'' Rabbi Andrew Baker, Washington area director of the American Jewish Committee, said, ''We are gathered to mourn the victims of apartheid,'' a system he described as ''a state-sponsored evil.'' The Rev. Robert F. Drinan, a professor at Georgetown University Law Center and a former Congressman, said Americans had been ''guilty of many sins of silence'' toward South Africa and its policy of racial separation. ''Never again will we be silent,'' he said. Mr. Koch said tonight that after the march he and Mr. Jackson had their first conversation ever, discussing various subjects. The Mayor, who is a candidate for re-election, said that he was impressed by Mr. Jackson and that he would invite Mr. Jackson to Gracie Mansion after the mayoral campaign. ''We hit it off famously,'' the Mayor said. ''I happen to think he is one of the most charismatic personalities. You have to like him.''"
