"President Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire met with President Bush and members of Congress today and was confronted with expressions of concern about reports of human rights abuses in his Central African country. But Mr. Mobutu was also praised as a peacemaker whose diplomacy was helping bring an end to 14 years of civil war in neighboring Angola. Mr. Mobutu defended Zaire's record on human rights, insisting that abuses had been overstated by critics. In a report this year, the State Department said that freedom of speech, freedom of the press and other rights were ''substantially circumscribed'' in Zaire. It said that ''many human rights abuses stem from endemic corruption'' among Zairian officials. After meeting with Mr. Bush at the White House, Mr. Mobutu said his country had taken steps to improve the protection of human rights. As a result, he said, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights recently removed Zaire from the list of nations subject to special monitoring. 'Incidental Mishaps' Mr. Mobutu seemed to say that any violations of human rights were ''incidental mishaps.'' In a departure ceremony outside the White House, he said, ''Zaire can be ranked among those countries which observe the rule of law, not to be confused or mistaken with any incidental mishaps that are attributable to an administration or to individuals.'' President Mobutu had tea this afternoon with members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee. A person who attended the meeting said that he ''became annoyed, angry and aggressive and delivered long-winded rebuttals'' when members of Congress criticized his record on human rights. Mr. Bush spent 2 hours 15 minutes with the Zairian leader. An Administration official said the President ''raised the issue'' of human rights and expressed concern about ''problems and deficiencies'' in Zaire's record. The President did not mention Zaire's human rights problems in his public farewell statement to Mr. Mobutu. He praised the African leader for helping to bring about a cease-fire in Angola. Leaders of the Angolan Government and rebel forces agreed to the truce last week when they met at Mr. Mobutu's country estate. The Central Intelligence Agency has worked closely with Mr. Mobutu for years. Angolan military commanders and Western diplomats in Zaire say the agency sent weapons through Zaire to the Angolan guerrilla forces led by Jonas Savimbi. Long Incumbency Mr. Mobutu has been President of Zaire since 1965 and was recorded as having won 99 percent of the vote in the last election, in 1984. Mr. Bush and Mr. Mobutu promised that there would be closer economic ties between the two nations. They exchanged paperwork for a treaty to encourage increased American investment. Zaire has been plagued by allegations of corruption and mismanagement. But Mr. Bush today praised Mr. Mobutu's recent commitment to an economic austerity program as a condition for receiving assistance from the International Monetary Fund. Richard A. Boucher, the deputy spokesman for the State Department, said that American officials regularly discussed human rights problems with Zaire. He said that ''President Mobutu has recently taken a number of steps to correct abuses'' of human rights. A study by the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Africa said that Zaire was still ''very repressive.''"
