"The Government of Malawi, one of the larger recipients of United States economic and military aid in sub-Saharan Africa, has been harshly criticized in a report by a human rights organization for the killings of political opponents, intolerable conditions in overcrowded jails and ethnic discrimination. ''Although many states in sub-Saharan Africa suffer from greater political violence than Malawi, there are fewer African countries with such a combination of totalitarianism and personal despotism,'' concluded the assessment on Malawi issued this month by Africa Watch, a group based in London. Much of the 116-page report, which reviews the 26-year rule of President H. Kamuzu Banda, concurs with last year's State Department report on human rights in Malawi, a sliver of land in southern Africa that is miserably poor and, because of an almost total ban on foreign reporters, largely forgotten. Like Africa Watch, the State Department pointed to the murder of a leading political dissident; the death in prison, apparently from torture, of a Government official suspected of leaking information, and the use of arbitrary detention to suppress any sign of dissent. U.S. Criticizes but Gives Aid But Africa Watch points to what it calls the inconsistency between the declared interest of the United States in human rights and its policy of increasing economic and military assistance. Unlike other black-ruled nations in the region, Malawi has maintained formal relations with South Africa and thus has been praised by the Bush Administration for being a ''reliable partner'' in Southern Africa. The Government has also been lauded by the United States for admitting nearly 800,000 Mozambican refugees, the largest concentration in refugee-laden Africa. This year, Malawi was rewarded with $21.5 million in United States economic aid, up from $18 million in 1987, and was one of the handful of African countries to receive military aid. American officials said the military help of $2.2 million, nearly double the 1989 assistance, was to be spent on M-16 rifles, grenade launchers and training. In detailing human rights abuses in Malawi, Africa Watch said those arrested in the 1980's without charge and still in jail included the country's only neurosurgeon, Dr. George Mtafu and its best-known poet, Jack Mapanje. The organization said Fred Sikwese, the principal protocol administrator in the Ministery of External Affairs, was arrested in February 1989, apparently because he was suspected of leaking information about Malawi's relationship with South Africa. When his family visited him at Lilongwe Prison a month after his arrest, he was weak from lack of food and possibly from torture, the report said. He died in prison shortly after the visit. The authorities refused to give his body to his family for burial, the report said. Exiled Journalist Slain A Malawian journalist living in exile in Zambia, Mkwapatira Mhango, died after a firebomb attack on his home in Lusaka last October. The circumstances of the attack point to Malawian security guards in Lusaka having carried out the attack, the report said. The Malawian Government has said the deaths had been the result of internal feuding within the Malawian opposition. Describing a police shooting in March this year, the Africa Watch report said 20 protesters were shot dead in Lilongwe after city residents threw stones at a convoy of armed police. The report said that the shootings were not mentioned in the heavily censored Malawian press but that two senior police officials were dismissed after the incident. The Africa Watch report said it did not agree with suggestions by the State Department that there was little ethnic discrimination in Malawi. The organization said President Banda, a member of the Chewa ethnic group from the central region of the country, had practiced a policy of ''systematic exclusion of people from the northern region, as well as Yaos from the southern region, from political power.'' A system of limiting educational opportunities for northerners, who have traditionally excelled at school and at the national university, was introduced three years ago, the report said."
