"WHEN President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda seized power nearly nine months ago, his takeover of this impoverished country raised hopes of security, political stability and strict concern for human rights in a nation that has suffered wave upon wave of brutish atrocities of ethnic and religious origin. But enthusiasm has given way to caution as Mr. Museveni now struggles with the worst political crisis since he came to power, creating concern about the future of his fragile coalition Government and doubts whether stability and peace can soon find a niche in the historically chaotic political landscape of the East African country once terrorized by its leader, Idi Amin. The crisis grow out of the indictment on treason charges of three Cabinet ministers and a former vice president, along with three high-ranking commanders in Mr. Museveni's army and other prominent Ugandans. The indictments came against a backdrop of bloody rebellion in the north and mounting pressures in the south from members of the Baganda, Uganda's largest and historically dominant tribe, who want to re-establish their own independent monarchist state. There were new charges last week that the Government of Mr. Museveni, who has vowed to protect human rights, was carrying out widespread arbitrary arrests and detentions. Political specialists said the indictments seem to be directed mainly at three smaller political elements in the coalition Government, which is dominated by Mr. Museveni's National Resistance Movement. The indictments raised concern that the President might try to tighten his control by cracking down on minor groups and fashioning a government solely of political loyalists. Charged with plotting to overthrow the Government were Paulo Muwanga, Vice President and Minister of Defense under President Milton Obote; Energy Minister Andrew Kayiira, who is leader of the Uganda Freedom Movement; Environment Minister David Lwanga, chairman of the Federal Democratic Movement, and Commerce Minister Avaristo Nyanzi, who is treasurer of the Conservative Democratic Party. The former Vice President, the three ministers and some other prominent defendants are members of the Baganda tribe. Mr. Museveni, who is against tribalism, has engendered the hostility of some of Uganda's three million Baganda - one quarter of the population - over his reluctance to restore hereditary kingdoms. Amid the latest problems, Mr. Museveni now faces charges from a prominent Ugandan human rights group that his Government, which has strongly condemned past atrocities, is guilty of gross human rights abuses. The Star, an independent newspaper in Kampala, seemed to speak for many Ugandans in a recent editorial. ''Whether the accusations against these people are true or not,'' the newspaper said, ''we feel an urgent need to remind our leaders that the ordinary man prefers peace and security to the conflict of who rules.''"
