"The Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law, a national civil rights organization, has taken on a decidedly international issue. The Washington-based group is trying to draw worldwide attention to the names of those who may be in the custody of the South African police and to the rigidity of that country's clampdown on free expression. Despite the censorship laws in South Africa, members of the group, working with Amnesty International and the World Council of Churches, have managed to obtain partial lists of detainees. And then the group turned to Congress for some timely publicity. Before recessing for the July Fourth holiday, members of both the House and the Senate had used their pulpits to recite lists of the missing South Africans. Drawing attention to names of detainees has proved effective for other human rights organizations in the past, and a spokesman for Amnesty International today praised the Lawyers' Committee for its effort. ''Countries do notice when people are watching them,'' said Al I. Cyllah, Africa area coordinator for Amnesty International. ''We believe that has minimized torture and has released many people from many prisons.'' In the case of South Africa, the publicity has a second point as well, a Lawyers' Committee spokesman said. By reading a list of names that South African press restrictions would prohibit being aired inside that country, the committee hopes to drive home some of the frustration of operating under strict censorship regulations. Under South African emergency regulations, any person in South Africa who publishes the names of people suspected to be under detention faces a possible 10-year jail sentence and $8,000 fine. Members of Congress have the luxury of drawing attention to the names without facing those consequences. ''This dramatizes the state of emergency in that country,'' said Jackie Parker, an aide to Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan. ''It is powerful to read a list of clergy members, of trade union representatives and others and realize that we have no idea where they are because their government refuses to say.''"
