"Amnesty International issued a survey today on children who are victims of political repression around the world, citing 18 countries in which ''the most basic rights'' of children were violated. A spokesman for the rights group, Sean Stiles, said the actual number of countries involved could be much higher because only documented reports were considered. ''Children have been unjustly imprisoned, tortured, killed and orphaned by the state'' around the world, said Amnesty International, the winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1977. ''Some have been forced to watch their parents being tortured and others have been born in prison and taken away from their mothers at birth.'' South Africa Is Singled Out The survey, published in the group's January newsletter, singled out South Africa for violations against children under emergency regulations first declared in June 1985 to quell racial unrest. The South African Government acknowleged last April that 1,424 children under the age of 18 were detained under the emergency regulations. But Amnesty International's survey quoted an estimate by monitoring groups that 11,000 children were detained in South Africa between 1984 and 1986. ''Some were beaten, whipped and kicked for several hours; others were given electrical shocks,'' it said. The survey cited individual cases around the world to illustrate different types of violations against children. It said, for example, that Turkish security forces reportedly tortured four Anatolian boys with electrical shocks to the mouth after Kurdish guerrilla activity in the area in April 1987. Saying that massacres of civilians occur worldwide, the survey said children as young as 2 were among the 17 victims of a massacre by Philippine troops in February 1987. Other such cases are reported from Colombia, Syria and Burma. In Iraq, the group said, 29 of 300 children and young people arrested in the northern town of Sulaimaniya in late 1985 were reportedly put to death and ''some of those executed apparently had their eyes gouged out.'' In Ecuador, an 8-year-old boy was thrown over a roll of barbed wire and beaten by soldiers searching for a stolen rifle last April, it said. From Burma, the report said Noor Jahan was jailed at the age of 1 with her mother as suspected illegal immigrants and reportedly remains incarcerated 30 years later. Similarly, Ammonissa Issa, 7, has been held in a prison in Ethiopia since birth with her mother, a political prisoner, it said. Other cases of abducted, detained or imprisoned children are reported from Chile, Israel and Uganda, and cases of ''disappeared'' children are reported from Afghanistan, Argentina, Peru and Sri Lanka. In Suriname a 3-year-old boy was shot dead by security forces in August 1986, the report said. In Lebanon, Syrian troops and Syrian-backed forces killed more than 200 people, including women and children, in the city of Tripoli in December 1986, Amnesty International said. Children from the age of 12 in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip have reportedly been ill treated by members of the Israeli military, Amnesty said. Anyone wishing to obtain a free copy of the report may write to Amnesty International U.S.A., Publications Department, 322 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001."
