"The State Department's principal African expert made an unannounced visit here today for talks with Government and opposition leaders and relief officials. United States officials said the Ugandan human rights situation, described by the State Department last month as ''among the most grave in the world,'' was to be a major topic. An aide said that the visiting official, Chester A. Crocker, Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, met with President Milton Obote and planned to confer with him again Tuesday before leaving for Nairobi, Kenya, the last stop on an African tour. The aide said Prime Minister Otema Alimadi had presided at a luncheon for Mr. Crocker attended by church leaders, Red Cross and Unicef officials and the ambassadors of Western nations that have provided aid to Uganda. Meetings were also scheduled with a representative of the opposition Democratic Party, which has accused security forces of atrocities against civilians in the conflict against insurgents. Mr. Crocker, who arrived here from Tanzania, had not originally included Uganda in his published itinerary. His visit was announced this morning by the Uganda radio. Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, spoke of the situation in Uganda before a Congressional committee on Aug. 9 and in interviews. ''In recent months, repeated reports of large-scale civilian massacres, forced starvation and impeded humanitarian relief operations indicate that Uganda has one of the most serious human rights problems in the world today,'' he said. He said the violence was increasing despite United States appeals to curb attacks on civilians in the army's operations against the rebels. It is estimated by church groups and relief agencies that 200,000 people have been killed over the last four years. Most of the fighting between troops and the rebels has taken place in the Luwero, Mpigi and Mubende districts.The area, known as the Luwero Triangle, is the stronghold of the National Resistance Army led by Yoweri K. Museveni. His group has been fighting the Government since February 1981, charging that the election won by Mr. Obote in December 1980 was rigged."
