"Gen. Samuel K. Doe, the Liberian President, ''has sanctioned an undercurrent of lawlessness and random brutality'' by the military since he took power in 1980, a New York-based human rights group said last week. On the anniversary of an unsuccessful coup attempt last Nov. 12, the group, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, issued a 175-page report that described hundreds of instances of summary executions by soldiers as well as abuses involving arson, looting, rape and dismemberment of bodies of slain rebels. The report also quoted several people who said they witnessed acts of cannibalism. The accounts said Government soldiers ate the bodies of the leaders of the unsuccessful coup attempt. ''The Government's failure to investigate or prosecute abuses of human rights has reinforced the widely held view that the soldiers remain a law unto themselves,'' the report said. It added that the abuses had inflamed ethnic tensions along tribal lines that could result in renewed violence. J. Emmanuel Bowier, a spokesman for the Liberian Embassy in Washington, said he had not seen a copy of the report and could not comment on it. The Lawyers Committee for Human Rights also criticized American policies toward Liberia, saying Liberians believed that the United States was ''sowing the seeds of further conflict.'' It added: ''It continues to provide substantial, largely unconditional economic and military assistance directly to the Liberian Government. The United States has thus become closely identified with the Doe regime.'' The report charged that Liberia had made no improvement in political freedoms or human rights conditions, despite a return to constitutional rule in January. ''The Government has continued to enforce many of the decrees and bannings that curtailed free speech and political activity under martial law,'' the report said. In particular, it said, students, teachers, opposition political leaders and journalists have frequently been victims of arbitrary detentions and other abuses. As a result, the report added, many of Liberia's most prominent leaders have fled and now live in exile in the United States. One prominent political leader, Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, a former vice president of Citibank, fled to the United States in September because she said her life was threatened by the chairman of the governing party. The rights report did not implicate General Doe personally in the abuses. But it said hundreds of suspected rebels were ordered killed outside the executive mansion by Col. Harrison Pennue, a close associate of General Doe. The killings reportedly continued for five days after the coup attempt. The report also quotes a witness who said Charles Gbenyon, a journalist, was killed by soldiers inside the executive residence. Estimates of the number of people killed in the aftermath of the coup attempt range from the Government's account of 49 deaths to the opposition's assertion of more than 2,000. The failure of the Government to investigate the reported abuses and to prosecute offenders may cause further unrest, according to the rights group."
