"Fresh details of an alleged assassination squad operated by the South African police have emerged from a third man identifying himself as a squad member, and Government critics have continued to call for an independent judicial inquiry into the scandal. David (Spyker) Tshikalange was quoted in the current issue of Vrye Weekblad, an Afrikaans-language weekly, as saying he watched colleagues stab to death Griffiths Mxenge, a civil-rights lawyer in Durban, in 1981. Mr. Tshikalange said that on another occasion he saw a body wrapped in plastic lying in the car of his superior, Maj. Eugene de Kock, whose name has surfaced in connection with the deaths of 13 suspected members of the outlawed African National Congress. Mr. Tshikalange, who is said to have fled to Botswana, is the third man to confess to a role in the alleged squad, the existence of which is denied by the South African Police. Butana Almond Nofomela, a condemned murderer, stayed his execution last month by alleging that he helped the police carry out killings, bombings and other acts of terror against opponents of apartheid. Dirk Coetzee, a retired captain in the security police, said in an interview published last week by Vrye Weekblad that he had led one of five hit squads operating out of the Vlakplaas police base near Pretoria. Mr. Coetzee, who is reported to be hiding in Europe, is white; Mr. Nofomela and Mr. Tshikalange are black. Their reports have embarrassed the Government of President F. W. de Klerk at a time when he has said that South Africa is moving away from its old policies of white domination. The Government has asked Timothy P. McNally, the Attorney General of the Orange Free State, to investigate the charges with the assistance of a senior police officer, Gen. Alwyn Conradie. Some critics of apartheid say they fear a whitewash and have asked for an independent judicial inquiry at which witnesses can be questioned publicly and police files subpoenaed. Denis Worrall, a co-leader of the Democratic Party, which represents liberal whites in Parliament, told a news conference in Pretoria today that Mr. de Klerk's integrity and commitment to change would be judged according to how he handled the death squad allegations. Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok has called the death squad claims part of a plot to undermine South Africa's security police. Speaking to a National Party meeting on Thursday night in the Orange Free State town of Ceres, Mr. Vlok charged that the African National Congress and the South African Communist Party were behind the allegations. ''They must get the police and the security forces out of their way to make it easier to bring about their aim of creating a Communist state,'' said Mr. Vlok, who has been asked by President de Klerk for a report on the affair. 'There Was Blood Everywhere' In the latest interview with Vrye Weekblad, Mr. Tshikalange said he watched Mr. Nofomela and two other policemen carry out instructions to kill Mr. Griffiths and make it look like a robbery. ''The other three stabbed him again and again and again,'' Mr. Tshikalange was quoted as saying. ''There was blood everywhere.'' Mr. Coetzee said last week that the four men were paid 1,000 rand each, now about $380, for the murder. Mr. Tshikalange said he later became a driver for Major de Kock, who he said replaced Mr. Coetzee as squad leader. ''One night in 1983, I saw a corpse in de Kock's car,'' Mr. Tshikalange said. ''The man looked familiar to me but was wrapped in plastic and his head was covered in blood.'' Mr. Nofomela has alleged that he saw Major de Kock shoot a man in 1985 after interrogating him. In the interview, Mr. Tshikalange also told of cruising around black townships looking for suspected members of the African National Congress. The suspects, he said, were confronted and killed. The police have declined to have Major de Kock respond on the ground that the allegations are under investigation."
