"An American Congressman said today that a growing trend of human rights abuses by the Government of Kenya could ultimately lead to instability and damage the country's strong relations with the United States. The legislator, Representative Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, said his personal experiences in Kenya since he arrived on Friday had reinforced his concerns on human rights. He asserted that scheduled meetings with Kenyans never took place because of Government intimidation and that a meeting with a church leader had been broken up by the police. Mr. Wolpe, the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Africa, said at a news conference here that he had received ''a number of reports'' of a marked decline in political and press freedom in Kenya, which over the last decade has been one of the largest recipients of United States aid in Africa. Mr. Wolpe voiced concern over an increase in what he called intimidation and imprisonment of people because of their political views. He said that the holding of as many as 62 political prisoners had been publicly acknowledged, although some critics of the Government contend that more than 1,000 are being held. Mr. Wolpe also said that there had been a steady increase in the number of arrests of Kenyans critical of the Government's policies. 'I Am Here as a Friend' Mr. Wolpe specifically mentioned the case of Maina wa Kinyatti, a senior lecturer at Kenyatta University who was jailed in 1982 on charges of possessing a seditious publication. Mr. Kinyatti was sentenced to six years in a maximum-security prison and was recently denied a reduction in his sentence. The Congressman said that Mr. Kinyatti's health was rapidly deteriorating and that he had asked Kenya's Foreign Minister to release Mr. Kinyatti on humanitarian grounds. The Congressman had stopped briefly in Kenya after visits to Zimbabwe and Botswana, where he was co-chairman of a meeting of the African-American Institute. Mr. Wolpe said that he had asked for a meeting with Kenya's President, Daniel arap Moi, and two Government ministers to discuss the human rights issue as well as economic and other matters, but had been told that they were unavailable. The Congressman's visit came during a growing crackdown on internal dissent, according to political commentators here. A recently approved constitutional amendment stripped the security of tenure from the powerful posts of Attorney General and Auditor General, making them subject to dismissal by the President."
