"WEARY of supporting Col. Mengistu Haile Meriam and his endless civil war, the Soviet Union is quietly encouraging Ethiopia to re-establish relations with its old ally, the United States. For a Government that prides itself on Marxist-Leninist purity, the rapprochement is bound to be difficult. So far, Ethiopia's gestures toward reconciliation have often come wrapped in socialist rhetoric, apparently intended to show that there is really no deviation from the revolutionary ideals that toppled Emperor Haile Selassie 15 years ago. But there seems little doubt that during a visit to Moscow last year, Colonel Mengistu was told to broaden his international contacts. At a time when they are reining in their foreign committments, the Soviets are less willing to pay for the long-standing war between the Ethiopian Government and secessionist rebels in the north. The country's economy is in shreds and the Soviets would like some Western financial help in patching the country together. Since taking power Colonel Mengistu has not been to Western Europe or the United States, though he has often found time to visit North Korea, a favorite political model. But after the Moscow trip, he dispatched his foreign minister to two Western European capitals and invited a high-level American official to Addis Ababa. Michael H. Armacost, an Under Secretary of State, was due in Ethiopia just before Christmas but was said by diplomats here to have been delayed because of the transition at the State Department. He would have been the highest-ranking American official to visit in at least a decade. Still, the renewed relationship will start with what an American diplomat called ''modest steps.'' In a recent interview, Colonel Mengistu said he could not realistically expect American economic assistance any time soon. Human Rights Abuses Before it gets American aid, Ethiopia will have to do something about human rights abuses. It was this issue that led the Carter Administration to halt American military sales to the country in 1977. The Soviet Union jumped in to fill the vacuum, and the United States threw its support to Ethiopia's hostile neighbor, Somalia. Human rights groups have reported that several thousand political prisoners are in Ethiopian jails. And Washington officials have long criticized the Government on famine relief, contending that it puts political considerations ahead of saving lives. Among the first steps that Ethiopia and the United States are contemplating are increased diplomatic contact - relations were downgraded in 1980 by the Ethiopians - as well as educational and cultural exchanges. Farther down the line, an American official said, is the possibility of a return of Peace Corps volunteers. In the meantime, Ethiopia's overtures to the United States are being accompanied by unusual frankness on the domestic front. It was widely reported in the Ethiopian press that Colonel Mengistu told his fellow Central Committee members in November that it was ''frightening'' to see that agricultural productivity was ''steadily decreasing'' while the population was increasing at a rate of 3 percent a year. He acknowledged that the country's growth rate had been less than 2 percent annually since 1974 and described economic damage caused by the civil war as ''disastrous.'' Nevertheless, he supported some of the same socialist agricultural policies that have troubled the West. ''Villagization'' - forcing isolated peasants into larger communities - would be stepped up, as would the resettlement of families to potentially more fertile grounds. Colonel Mengistu also offered some economic plans that might play better in the West. More private enterprise would be encouraged, he said, including joint ventures with foreign companies. Exactly how these plans will be executed is not clear. The United States will be waiting to see whether this high-level window dressing is accompanied by real changes in the way the country is run. But as objectionable as they find Colonel Mengistu's Government, a good many American officials seem to believe once again that Ethiopia is vital to stability in Africa's strategically important Horn."
