"The South African Government over many years has used force to crush demands for change. That is its answer now: repression at home, aggression abroad. But this time the victims of apartheid have not been crushed. After a year, after thousands of detentions, the protest continues. The situation is different from the past in another crucial respect. The world knows that South Africa is highly vulnerable to economic pressure. We learned so last month, when Second of two articles foreign bankers' loss of confidence in the country's outlook led to a run on the rand and the Government stopped payment on international debts until Jan. 1. Knowledge brings responsibility. Those who have the power to influence South Africa must use it to help end the suffering of a great country. The responsibility rests especially on American institutions, because South Africans care so much about American views. They want to feel connected to the United States. The time has come to make clear to South Africans that they cannot have such a connection to us while their political system is based on racism. The time has come for American banks and businessmen and universities to send that message: urgently, unequivocally. The old arguments about whether to pull out of South Africa have really been decided, though voices linger. Events have decided them. President Botha decided them this summer when he spurned the idea of meaningful change, imposed his emergency and sent the police and army to occupy black townships. American companies operating in South Africa used to argue that they did good there by staying. They followed the Sullivan principles, they would say, and set a good example by desegregating factories. But desegregating a few factories does not seem meaningful when the country is in turmoil over people's yearning for elemental rights: the right to vote, the right to live with your family. The Sullivan principles never meant much to South Africans, and they have become irrelevant. What matters to businessmen is the attitude of the South African Government. They do not believe that the economic system will function while Mr. Botha says Never. That is why even I.B.M., which has been a principal voice for staying, has started to say it is ''discouraged'' and to deplore the ''intransigence of the South African Government.'' Opponents of disinvestment have also argued that it would hurt blacks in South Africa. But according to recent studies, blacks favor the idea overwhelmingly, even if they might lose their own jobs. A Gallup poll last month said 77 percent favored economic sanctions ''unless South Africa agrees to get rid of the apartheid system.'' An important sign of changing attitudes on disinvestment was a cover story in the Sept. 23 issue of Business Week. ''If there is no significant progress soon,'' the article concluded, ''U.S. companies will have little moral or business reason to remain.'' My view is that companies like I.B.M. and General Motors and Ford and Xerox should state their intention to leave South Africa within a very short time unless the Government agrees to real change. A convenient deadline would be Jan. 1, when South Africa is due to resume repaying foreign loans. South African businessmen have already defined what the Government must do: end the emergency, release political prisoners, abolish apartheid and start negotiating the political future of the country. Those are the minimum terms for restoring order and hope to South Africa. The same urgency, and the same sense of what is needed, should apply at American universities and other institutional shareholders. They should undertake now to sell their shares in any company that remains in South Africa after Jan. 1, unless real change is under way. A university is once-removed from the issue, but after the events of recent months that cannot be an excuse for inaction. Harvard's voice will be heard if it speaks clearly and firmly now: heard at I.B.M. and heard in South Africa. Bishop Desmond Tutu, speaking by telephone to the University of Indiana last week, appealed for ''sharp and short and dramatic action'' from institutions abroad. That kind of intervention, he said, is ''our last chance for reasonably peaceful change in South Africa.''"
