"The President of Zaire yesterday brushed aside as ''interference'' criticism of his human rights record by American legislators. Mobutu Sese Seko said in an interview that Americans should instead focus on his Central African nation's ''true human rights drama'' - the burden of repaying the foreign debt. Mr. Mobutu, leader of one of Africa's most populous nations and a close ally of the Reagan Administration, said he came to the United States ''to say goodbye to President Reagan.'' In the capital this week, members of Congress are expected to question him about reported human rights abuses, and international bankers are expected to press him to maintain payments on Zaire's $7 billion foreign debt. ''It's an interference in Zaire's internal affairs,'' Mr. Mobutu said of a bill in the House of Representatives to end military aid and to condition further economic aid on improvements in Zaire's human rights situation. The measure, sponsored by Representative Ronald V. Dellums, Democrat of California, has 37 co-sponsors. The Zairian President seemed unperturbed about the threat to this year's American assistance, which consists of $3 million in military aid and $60 million in economic aid. ''I'm going to see 200 Congressmen - I have a good case,'' President Mobutu said. He was interviewed at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in Manhattan, where he was surrounded by his traditional totems of power: a leopard-skin hat and his carved walking stick. The African leader is also expected to discuss debt relief in talks scheduled with President Reagan and with officials of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. ''If we don't watch out, North-South relations are heading straight for catastrophe,'' Mr. Mobutu said, referring to difficulties that third-world countries encounter in servicing their foreign debts. From 1983 to 1986, he said, Zaire paid $2 billion, or half the money it receives from exports, for interest on its loans from foreign sources. In that period, he said, the country received $1 billion in new loans and investment. ''Zaire became a net exporter of capital,'' he said. ''When the poor give more to the rich, do you call that human rights?'' Critics of Mr. Mobutu, including Representative Dellums, have charged that corruption and mismanagement have undermined Zaire's ability to pay off the debt. Turning to other topics, Mr. Mobutu rejected accusations by Angolan officials that the Reagan Administration has used bases in southern Zaire to train and arm Angolan rebels. Asserting that Zaire was made a ''scapegoat'' for the spreading rebellion by the anti-Marxist National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, Mr. Mobutu repeated an earlier offer to open his largest base, Kamina, to permanent international inspection. Estimating that the rebels control one-third of Angola, Mr. Mobutu said that their arms in fact come from South-West Africa, the South African-administered territory also known as Namibia. The leader of the Angolan rebels, Jonas Savimbi, is expected to visit New York and Washington later this month."
