"Finally, the Clinton Administration has gotten the message: Reports of U.S. and civilian casualties are threatening to sink public support for U.N. peacekeeping in Somalia -- and in general. Humanitarian relief has degenerated into a turf war against one holdout warlord, Mohammed Farah Aidid. Now Washington is demanding that U.S. forces no longer be used on patrol missions in the Aidid stronghold of south Mogadishu, and is seeking a redirection of the mission toward diplomatic and political reconstruction of a Somali government. With those goals in mind, useful lessons can be drawn from the just-completed operation in Cambodia, where, against long odds, the U.N. achieved its main goals on schedule and is now withdrawing. The two biggest challenges for Yasushi Akashi, who headed that U.N. mission, came from the Khmer Rouge, which abruptly withdrew from the peace agreement, and hard-line elements of the Vietnamese-installed Cambodian Government, which intimidated and murdered political opponents virtually under the eyes of U.N. peacekeepers. Mr. Akashi understood the difference between peacekeeping and partisan engagement. The U.N. did not try to disarm the Khmer Rouge forcibly. And it relied mainly on diplomatic pressure to curb human rights abuses. Like the Khmer Rouge, General Aidid reneged on his commitments to cooperate with the U.N. And since June he has orchestrated attacks on peacekeepers within his south Mogadishu stronghold. But there's one critical difference between Cambodia and Somalia. Successive U.N. Security Council resolutions this year have called explicitly for disarming warlords in Somalia and prosecuting people responsible for attacks on peacekeepers -- good ideas in principle, but a prescription for military confrontation in the country's present confusion. That overambitious mandate has effectively denied Adm. Jonathan Howe, who heads the U.N. Somalia mission, the kind of diplomatic flexibility that proved so crucial to Mr. Akashi's success. A restless Congress has set a Nov. 15 deadline for deciding the future of U.S. military participation in Somalia. That may be enough time to shift toward the more successful Cambodian model, perhaps by relocating U.N. units outside south Mogadishu. As Mr. Akashi has demonstrated, knowing how to evade destructive confrontations may be the surest path to peacemaking success."
