"The Nigerian President, Gen. Ibrahim Babangida, has called on Western nations to pay compensation to Africa for the damage done to the continent by the slave trade. Mr. Babangida said the enslavement of as many as 30 million Africans had greatly contributed to the ""marginalization"" of Africa. He said that before the coming of the slave trade and the capture of ""young, virile Africans"" who would have helped build the continent, Africa and Europe were almost equal in levels of development. ""We call on all the countries of Europe and the Americas to compensate Africa for the untold hardship and exploitation that the continent had been subjected to in the past,"" Mr. Babangida said at a three-day conference here this week. The task of obtaining reparations, the leader of Africa's most populous nation added, ""would not be easy, but we must begin now."" He said he would soon put forward a detailed reparations proposal. The conference, ""Reparations for Africa and Africans in the Diaspora,"" was sponsored by Chief Basorun Abiola, publisher of The National Concord, one of Nigeria's largest newspapers. Will Have a Platform Next year, General Babangida is scheduled to assume the rotating presidency of the Organization of African Unity, a yearlong role that places him in a position to offer his proposal to a larger audience. The annual meeting of heads of government of the organization is to held next June in Abuja, which is becoming Nigeria's new capital, near the center of the country. Among those attending the conference were a number of American politicans, academics and community leaders, including Martin Luther King 3d, a son of the late civil rights leader, who told reporters that he strongly supported the reparations effort. General Babangida's aides said there was substantial precedent for the payment of reparations. They cited the example of reparations paid to Israel by West Germany for atrocities committed under the Nazis, and more recently, the United Nations resolution backing the payment of reparations by Iraq to Kuwait for damage and looting by its occupation forces. Another possible consequence of the proposal, aides to General Babangida said, is that it might provide African nations with some leverage in their negotiations with foreign creditors to reduce their debt obligations. Nigeria's foreign debt, for example, has soared -- from $452 million in 1970, and $18 billion in 1984, to about $30 billion last year. Meanwhile, the country's debt-service ratio, the portion of export earnings devoted to paying interest on the debt, went from 4.3 percent to about 26 percent in the same period. Little Sympathy in the West Several Western diplomats said it was doubtful that the call for reparations would receive a sympathetic hearing from their governments. They noted, moreover, that while the Lagos conference focused mostly on Europe and North America, many Arab nations were also involved in the slave trade, as were some collaborating Africans. Some African ethnic groups also took slaves for their own use. Nonetheless, General Babangida's remarks have stirred mostly favorable comment here. Nsikak Essien, a leading newspaper columnist, said: ""Africa's foreign debt is today beyond what we will ever be able to pay. The world is slowly turning all of us into slaves again. After 500 years of brutalization, Africa must be rehabilitated. We must be brought back to the human family by those who plundered our wealth."" But Olisa Agbakuba, a lawyer and chairman of Nigeria's civil liberties organization, said it was ""wrongheaded to be looking for scapegoats at this point."" ""It's better, he said, ""that Africans address the more serious problems of corruption and bad government."""
