"Fifteen months after South Africa's longest and costliest mine strike ended, residual bitterness over mine violence and working conditions has erupted in a war of words between the Anglo American Corporation and the black miners' union. The 1987 strike, which lasted three weeks, cost the gold and coal mining industry an estimated $200 million in lost production. The strike ended only when Anglo American decided to close mine shafts and dismissed 40,000 miners, 23,000 of whom have been reinstated after long negotiations and arbitration. In a survey of what it calls ''intensified repression on Anglo American mines,'' the National Union of Mineworkers accused the corporation this week of a ''systematic campaign of retarding the union and intimidating its members.'' ''Despite the existence of a limited collective bargaining process, workers are experiencing a climate of repression and control on the mines so severe that conditions are, in many respects, as bad, or even worse, than in the period prior to unionization,'' the union said. The union said the corporation had rolled back the gains of the past to the point where the survival of the union was under threat. Officials at Anglo American, the country's biggest mining, industrial and financial group, have denied the assertions and have hit back at the union by publishing a list of violent incidents from April 1985 to September 1987, when the strike ended. Seventy-nine miners died in the period. Most of the deaths occurred in clashes between striking miners and those miners who wanted to work. The corporation has proposed to the union the adoption of a negotiated code of conduct to govern the behavior of all mine employees and to eliminate violence. About 55 percent of the company's miners are unionized. ''The Anglo American Corporation believes that all workers have the right to join or form unions of their choice and to bargain collectively and to strike peacefully,'' said Bobby Godsell, Anglo American's industrial relations manager. ''For industrial peace to be achieved all employees must also enjoy personal safety and have the freedom to make individual choices,'' he said. Mechanism for insuring mutual compliance with the code is as important as the code itself, Mr. Godsell said. The union has said it has no objection in principle to the code of conduct proposed by Anglo American, but it has called on the corporation to respond to specific allegations made by the union. In an interview with the newspaper Business Day today, an Anglo American spokesman said the corporation had tightened security because of increased violence. In some cases, he said, the corporation had banned union meetings, carried out room searches at miners' hostels and videotaped union meetings. This was done where the company believed that discussions would take place that could divide miners or lead to violence, the spokesman said. The union report said miners were experiencing job reservation on the basis of race at the company's mines and complained of overcrowdedness. ''The issue of violence on the mines has to be seen against the larger context of apartheid,'' said Marcel Golding, assistant general secretary of the miners' union."
