"Almost half the governments of the world held political prisoners in 1984, and many tortured inmates as an instrument of state policy or jailed citizens without charge or trial, according the annual report of a worldwide human rights monitoring group. ''The lives of thousands of citizens were deliberately taken by the state,'' and others died from neglect or ill-treatment, according to the 359-page report by the rights group, Amnesty International. The report, which reviewed human rights records of 123 countries, said precise statistics were difficult to obtain because ''secrecy concealed many deaths and governments denied responsibility for killings carried out on their orders or with their complicity.'' Though the group said it has been able to gather more statistics in recent years, it was unable to say if the report reflected an increase in violations. #1,513 Executions Reported Amnesty International, which opposes the death penalty for any crime, said it knew of 1,513 court-ordered executions that took place by the end of 1984. It said the United States had more than 1,400 prisoners on death row by the end of the year. In South Africa, the report said, where the death penalty is also used, 114 people, all but three of them black or people of mixed race, were hanged in a Pretoria prison. The report also expressed concern over the detainment without trial of many people, mostly blacks, by the South African security police and by the police in the South African ''homelands'' of Ciskei, Transkei and Venda. Amnesty International said it had intervened in more than 300 cases. Prisoners in homelands had been tortured and many were malnourished, it said. But the rights group said the South African Government had made significant changes in the prosecution of black people under the pass laws, which regulate where blacks live and work and restrict their freedom of movement. The pass laws, the report said, result ''in South Africa having per capita one of the highest prison populations in the world.'' After the publication in April 1984 of a report by a Government-appointed commission, which found special courts for blacks to be ''unnecessary, humiliating and repugnant'' and recommended that blacks be tried before magistrates courts, the South African Government made the changes, Amnesty International said. Criticism for Soviet Union In the Soviet Union, Amnesty International said it had particular concern for the ''many Soviet citizens imprisoned or confined in mental hospitals solely for the nonviolent excercise of their human rights.'' The report said Amnesty International investigated the cases of more than 560 political prisoners in the Soviet Union, but believed the total number to be much higher. The report said two rights activists died in prison after the Government rejected requests from doctors that they be released. More than 132 Soviet citizens were jailed under laws that restrict freedom of religion or expression, often after closed trials, according to the report. Afghanistan, Iran and Libya came under criticism by Amnesty International for condemning people in courts that the report said did not meet standards of international fairness. Violations in Afghanistan The report said that in the fighting in Afghanistan between Soviet-backed Government troops and Afghan rebels, there had been reported human rights violations on both sides, but that the refusal of the Government to allow in any international investigators made these charges difficult to prove. Amnesty International said that ''unarmed civilians were killed by Government forces because of their political beliefs - real or imputed - during counterinsurgency operations in Chad, El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, Uganda and other countries.'' In Chad, it said, hundreds of people ''disappeared'' or were executed without trial by forces loyal to the Government of Hissen Habre. Amnesty International said security or military forces in Guatemala had committed many human rights violations. A mission there, it said, found convincing evidence that the Guatemalan Army had also been resposible for ''abductions and killings of Guatemalan refugees and Mexican citizens on Mexican territory.'' In Cameroon, Sierra Leone and Zaire, Amnesty International pointed to a high incidence of prisoners who died of neglect and malnutrition."
