"Fighting back tears, Baruch Tegegne pleaded for assistance.  ''I am sure I am a stranger to many of you, as a black and a Jew,'' said Mr. Tegegne, who fled Ethiopia in 1974 and arrived in Israel two and a half years later. Before an audience of 300 yesterday at a Manhattan synagogue, Mr.  Tegegne joined with other speakers to urge American Jews to band together to help rescue a small group of Ethiopian Jews from what they believe to be persecution. ''We have given our blood to this religion,'' Mr. Tegegne said at a rally at the Lincoln Square Synagogue, at 200 Amsterdam Avenue. ''We do not have the right to practice, to go to school. We want that freedom.'' Mr. Tegegne and other speakers outlined what they termed a campaign of discrimination and harassment against Ethiopian Jews, known as Falashas, that some hinted could lead to a second Holocaust. The meeting was sponsored by the International Network of Children of Jewish Holocaust Survivors. The Falashas are native Ethiopians who for centuries have practiced Jewish customs and who claim descent from King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba. The State Department estimates that there are about 30,000 Falashas in Ethiopia. Before their first contact with Western Jews, in the mid-1800's, the Falashas did not speak Hebrew. Their Bible was written in Ge'ez, the language of the Christian church of Ethiopia, and they did not have access to the rabbinical interpretations of the Bible that determined many Jewish traditions, according to Kay K. Shelemay, a musicologist and historian who lived in Ethiopia for three years. Although for many years the Falashas were believed to be the objects of discrimination, concern about their plight has increased recently. Barbara Ribakove, a member of a group that visited a Falasha village last September, said the Falashas suffered from desperate poverty but maintained an ''invincible determination to be Jewish against all odds.'' Mrs. Ribakove said she believed that ''a psychological atmosphere that could open the way for another Holocaust is being built up.'' Dr. Shelemay said that the policies of Major Melaku, the governor of Gondar Province, where most Falashas live, had made it more difficult for the Falashas to practice their religion. Because the major believed that members of a Jewish rural development assistance organization were encouraging Ethiopians to emigrate illegally to Israel, he expelled the group, said Michael Winn, a freelance writer who has visited Ethiopia 10 times. Twenty schools and some synagogues established by the organization closed down as a result, Mr. Winn said. 'We Must Rise and Act' Rabbi Shlomo Riskin of the Lincoln Square Synagogue emphasized the significance of holding the rally during Passover, when Jews remember their days of slavery in Egypt. ''Do we feel hurt when a brother or sister Jew is hurting?'' he asked. ''It makes no difference whether that brother or sister is white or brown or yellow or black. We must rise and act now.'' But Dr. Shelemay and Mr. Winn, who did not speak at the rally, said they had not seen evidence that the Falashas had been singled out for discrimination. ''Reports of a second Holocaust are exaggerated, and a disservice to the memory of the Holocaust,'' Dr. Shelemay said. ''We can and should endorse the Falashas' right to emigrate. Their situation is difficult, but we should not exaggerate it.'' Emigration is illegal in Ethiopia. Mr. Winn, who returned from his latest trip to Ethiopia on Tuesday, said he believed the situation was easing, and that Falasha villages might be opened to tourists."
