"To hear Ian Smith and his cronies, Zimbabwe has gone straight over the dam to Marxist tyranny. Its press is no longer free, it is drifting to a one-party system, and its brutal police are torturing innocent whites. All this could be dismissed as a gross caricature if the Government in Harare (as Salisbury is now called) did not make Mr. Smith look good by unwisely lifting his passport and searching his home. ''They seem immune to reason and fair play,'' complains the former Prime Minister who led Rhodesia into rebellion to preserve white rule. It is a peculiar complaint, since Mr. Smith once jailed without trial any number of black opponents - including the present Prime Minister, Robert Mugabe. But that does not excuse Mr. Smith's harassment, nor lessen the gravity of charges that a high-handed Home Minister has condoned the torture of white airmen charged with sabotage. But repression is not systematic, nor has Zim-babwe gone radical.  The number of white farms has increased since independence in 1980.  The European population is down to some 150,000 from a peak of 278,000, but that is still a lot of whites among seven million blacks. And Mr. Mugabe's planning has shown a cautious, even conservative, bias to the private sector. What could turn a pragmatic regime radical is an ugly contest over oil. Oil-starved Zimbabwe tried a year ago to end its reliance on fuel shipped from South Africa by reopening a pipeline through Mozambique. Saboteurs destroyed 34 storage tanks in the Mozambican port of Beira; when pumping resumed this week, rebels severed the pipeline and again left Mr. Mugabe dependent on South Africa. A Mozambique resistance movement claims responsibility for the two attacks. But it would astonish no one if South Africa planned them, using black surrogates. Lashing out against black neighbors has become a habit in Pretoria. Mr. Mugabe has offended it by rejecting ministerial negotiations on a long-term fuel contract. He has blamed South Africans for suspicious forays into Zimbabwe by white soldiers last summer. Forcing Zimbabwe to its knees won't make it a safer neighbor for South Africa. The more Pretoria plays the bully, the greater the risk Zimbabwe will indeed be radicalized. Which may be what South Africa wants."
