"The architects of apartheid, South Africa's system of segregation and racial repression, are also its prisoners. Anyone who doubts that need only heed yesterday's long-awaited speech by President Botha of South Africa. Pressed at home and abroad for genuine change, the best he could offer was pitiful ''reforms'' unlikely to give even President Reagan plausible grounds for vetoing the mild sanctions Congress is likely to vote next month. There is no longer much argument against imposing them, as long as it is clearly understood that the gathering tragedy of South Africa is not one that sanctions can avert. For all its wealth and armored cars, the Pretoria Government is not strong enough to give elemental political justice to a huge, powerless black majority. Mr. Botha's prison is figurative, and political. Of the multiple audiences he was addressing yesterday at a National Party conference, the most vital was the whites who keep him in power to protect apartheid. Mr. Botha knows, better than they, the bitter cost of defending a system even Mr. Reagan finds indefensible. But even if Mr. Botha wished, there are truths he dare not utter to whites taught that their privilege is God-given. They heard what they wanted to hear yesterday: That South Africa is flourishing, that its racial policies are just and that spiraling violence is the work of Communists. And what did President Botha offer the huge black majority? A nebulous promise of consultation in revising the Constitution. Wider citizenship for blacks who are now ''citizens'' of tribal homelands. Some loosening of influx controls that limit movement of urban blacks. Mr. Botha was not trying to appeal to the outlawed African National Congress or its imprisoned leader, Nelson Mandela. But these ''reforms'' were cold and meager even to Chief Gatsha Buthelezi, the moderate Zulu chief. He did not hear what he most wanted to hear: a commitment to power-sharing, meaning a willingness to give blacks political rights within a new constitution. That's scarcely utopian when 6 million whites tyrannize 23 million blacks. That same goal is endorsed by the Urban Foundation of South Africa, the voice of establishment industrialists. Its reform agenda calls for ''the sharing of power,'' full citizenship for blacks and a willingness to deal with leaders like Mr. Mandela. Steps like these would begin to answer the concerns elsewhere, as manifested by the legislation for sanctions in Congress. One need have no illusions about the potency of sanctions to believe that Mr. Botha has just made the case for them. It will take much more than these disappointing ''reforms'' to free his country's blacks, and whites."
