"BOSTON If the white rulers of South Africa have an eye for external events that may affect them, and they do, they should be focusing hard on America right now. For something surprising and fundamental is happening here in regard to South Africa. Am ericans in significant numbers have begun to notice the evil of South African racism. They have begun to feel a responsibility for helping to bring its cruelty to an end. And there is reason to believe those feelings are not a passing phenomenon - that they are going to last and grow in intensity. The most visible sign of the new concern is the demonstrations that have taken place outside the South African Embassy in Washington for the last two weeks, and now at missions in other cities. Day after day members of Congress and other political and community leaders have picketed and deliberately invited arrest by walking across police lines. The demonstrations reflect a broad swath of centrist-liberal opinion. Highly respected black leaders have taken part. So have union officials, black and white. Thomas R. Donahue, secretary-treasurer of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., was arrested at the embassy this week. He said it was time to boycott South African imports and, if necessary, to prohibit U.S. investment in South Africa. The divestment movement has been gathering momentum. Five state governments and 11 cities have passed laws requiring that their pension or other funds sell shares in companies that operate in South Africa. Affected U.S. companies have begun to lobby against further legislation - but are keeping their names secret so they are not associated with apartheid.  The South African Government has contributed to the rise of American concern by tightening the screws of repression. According to unofficial counts, more than 1,000 critics of the Government have been detained without trial so far this year. Pretoria met a two-day protest strike last month by detaining 20 union leaders and sending troops into black townships. Some 6,000 striking employees of the state-owned Sasol company were summarily fired.  The continued detention of the union leaders is a particular provocation to the A.F.L.-C.I.O. Why didn't Pretoria release them promptly? The reason is basic to an understanding of South Africa. The minority that holds all power in South Africa is determined to go on doing so, and it believes that repression and force are necessary to that end. Detention, strike-breaking, the invention of mythical ''homelands,'' the destruction of black leaders: Whatever has to be done to keep the black majority from having political rights will be done.  But there is another truth in the South Africa situation, one that makes the expressions of American concern worthwhile. That is that those who hold power do care about outside, especially American, opinion.  The changes that have occurred in South Africa have occurred only because of outside pressure. Sports are to some degree desegregated because of the world boycott of South African teams, for example. Without pressure from abroad, nothing will change in South Africa. Those who have been demonstrating at South African missions have expressed anger, too, at the Reagan Administration's policy of ''constructive engagement'' with Pretoria. Assistant Secretary of State Chester A. Crocker, at a White House briefing, dismissed as ''rubbish'' the charge that the policy was ineffective in bringing about change. I am convinced that Mr. Crocker has objected to the South Africans' repression, and tried to make them understand American feelings about racism. On the other hand, I think he has underestimated the reaction of South African blacks to the appearance of U.S. friendship with Pretoria, and he was foolish to praise the recent constitutional change that threw a sop to Indians and Coloreds while continuing to exclude the African majority. But the point is that private U.S. organizations and expressions of opinion can do things not open to the Government. That is why the demonstrations and the divestment movement are so significant. Mr. Crocker said himself that Americans have a right to express their views peacefully ''on issues of concern.'' And he added: ''We share that concern.'' Forty years ago Gunnar Myrdal, in his great book ''An American Dilemma,'' said that Americans would do something about their race problem because it was ''on their minds and on their consciences.'' In this country, conscience matters. And South African racism is now on the American conscience. B"
