"On the eve of the first high-level official contact in a decade between Washington and the Government here, Amnesty International issued a report today on what it called ''the high level of serious human rights abuses'' in Ethiopia. The report by the human rights organization, which described torture as being a ''matter of routine'' in some Ethiopian prisons, came a day before the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Herman J. Cohen, is to arrive in Addis Ababa. The timing of the report was described as a coincidence, but it served to emphasize what officials in Washington have called the biggest obstacle to the improved relations that the Ethiopian Government seeks: Addis Ababa's human rights record. Amnesty International said several thousand suspected opponents of President Mengistu Haile Mariam's Marxist Government were imprisoned, many of them detained indefinitely and illegally. The report said three political prisoners had been detained for 15 years, among the longest held in Africa. Rights High on the Agenda It added that Ethiopia had ''one of the poorest records among African states'' for signing international human rights treaties. The Ethiopian Government had no immediate comment on the report, which was issued in London. Mr. Cohen, who is coming for a meeting with President Mengistu that Washington postponed in the aftermath of an aborted coup on May 16, will have human rights high on his agenda, officials said. He will also assess the seriousness of the Government's intent toward peace talks that it has said it wants with Eritrean rebels. Since human rights abuses were at the core of why relations with Ethiopia soured in the late 1970's, there would have to be progress in human rights before Washington could consider a resumption of economic or development aid, officials said. Such aid was halted 10 years ago, but humanitarian aid, particularly during the 1984-85 famine, has continued. The recent foreign aid bill approved by the House of Representatives said that if there was improvement in Ethiopia's human rights and progress toward ending the civil conflict, a resumption of economic aid would be viewed favorably. Charge d'Affaires Level A move on human rights from the Carter Administration in late 1979 prompted the Government to request the recall of the United States Ambassador. Since then, relations have been downgraded, with each country represented in each other's capital by a charge d'affaires. But for the last nine months, President Mengistu, under pressure from his main arms benefactor, the Soviet Union, to settle the crippling 28-year civil war and broaden his international contacts, has been sending open signals that he seeks a renewed relationship with Washington. The report by Amnesty International dealt with both Ethiopians arrested after the recent coup attempt and those held much longer. It noted that President Mengistu announced in early June that 176 people, mostly members of the armed forces and including 26 generals, were detained for suspected involvement in the coup plot. Some Said to Be Released They said an unknown number of officers in the northern command, based in Asmara in Eritrea, were killed by loyalists of President Mengistu and at least eight generals were killed, including the army chief of staff and the commander of the air force. An Ethiopian official said this week that some of those detained who were found not to be associated with the coup had already been released. The Minister of Industry and former air force commander, Fanta Belay, was among those known to have been arrested. Several Ethiopians said this week that Mr. Fanta appeared on television after his arrest, apparently badly beaten. The Amnesty report described two sets of prison conditions. In Central Investigation Centers, which are run by the Interior Ministry, detainees are believed ''to be tortured as a matter of routine, often repeatedly over a lengthy period,'' it said. But there were few reports of torture in the official prisons. A copy of the report may be obtained for $1.50 from Amnesty International, Publications Department, 322 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001."
