"The story of Guinean independence is one of many strands: of repressions and purges, and economic collapse coupled with the rising of national pride and what an official called ''dignity in rags.'' It is a tale, too, of long isolation giving way to a gradual opening of doors, of a personality cult that approaches deification.  Here in the capital, old, louvered shutters hang from rusting hinges in the heat, and windows deprived of glass afford vistas of decay: rooftops, corroded and corrogated, turned brown by the years; sidewalks composed of beaten earth walls made black and dank by moisture from the mangrove swamps, as if the humidity, once, had coiled about the city and settled, amid the tropical greenery, to infect it all. Yet, there is these days a stirring of change and a hint of explanation as the country strives to recover from what many Guineans now perceive as a national nightmare. Independence and Isolation Central to it all is President Ahmed Sekou Toure, under whose tutelage the nation, for the two decades after independence from France in 1958, turned in upon itself, a Soviet client state sealed off from the world as it underwent the catharsis of a tyranny ridding itself of opposition or dissent. It was a time, according to Amnesty International - whose utterances are much reviled here - of ''execution, torture, deliberate starvation, inhuman prison conditions.'' The military establishment called Camp Boiro, in downtown Conakry, achieved a notoriety in that period rivaled in Africa only by the pink-walled building of the State Research Bureau in Idi Amin's Uganda. Between 1969 and 1976, Amnesty International said in its most recent report on Guinea, 4,000 people were detained for political reasons, and ''the fate of 2,900 of them - most of them never tried - is unknown.'' In the last three years, however, there are said to have been no new purges of the kind that reached a climax in 1970, when a brief Portuguese invasion of Conakry was followed by mass arrests. The bodies of five conspirators were hanged from a bridge as a lesson to others who might contemplate similar treachery. Those who died after the invasion ''were not prisoners of conscience,'' a Guinean official insisted, ''they were traitors, they had come to invade this country, to topple the leadership, to destroy our independence and our nation.''  Xenophobia Said to Ease The xenophobia and paranoia that characterized the era, a Western diplomat said, have eased now, an assertion reflected in chance conversations with Guineans who seem relieved that, while their nation is still controlled by a political machine of high efficiency and a secret police of similar ubiquity, there has been some liberalization. The number of political prisoners, according to the United States State Department's most recent human rights report available here, is probably well under 1,000, and a delegation from Amnesty International last year noted improvement in prison conditions.  Guineans may travel more frequently these days, and President Toure, too, leaves the country more sure of himself. Once, in the grim days, he did not venture beyond his borders for 13 straight years. Mr. Toure has also sought Western friendships to balance his commitment to the Soviet Union. He visited the United States last summer to appeal for American private investment in Guinea. Here at home, Guineans and Westerners say, he has inculcated a sense of nationhood in this former colony that has produced patriotism and pride. There is also, a Guinean official said, a kind of democracy, for each Friday Guineans gathered in committees called Local Revolutionary Powers may air their grievances and discuss their destinies, though within the tight limits set by the sole party ''democracy'' does not, in Guinea, mean challenging the President. Easing of Controls The slow and still uncertain easing of controls dates to 1976 and 1977, when Mr. Toure finally became friendly with Senegal and the Ivory Coast, which he had accused to providing sanctuary for some of the hundreds of thousands of Guineans who fled repression. Once convinced that he was no longer under the threat of external aggression, a Western diplomat said, Mr. Toure began his modest loosening of Guinea's political corset. Some say he had little choice, for the women of Guinea had made a protest that was not easily forgotten. By 1977 the President's economic socialism had ruined the country.  So the women of the market, dressed in the flamboyant colors of West Africa, took to the streets to demand change. A French press report at the time said they took recourse to that most grave of Guinean female-to-male insults: they bared bottoms to display displeasure. The President took heed, and the first impact of his subsequent bow toward private enterprise was a dramatic increase in small-scale commercial activity. The markets revived.  ''You can fault this place for a lot of things,'' a Western businessman said, ''but no one starves here.'' 'Little Freedom to Dissent' But, according to the State Department, ''the Guinean Government does not tolerate dissent from its political and ideological tenets'' and ''there is little freedom to dissent or to avoid taking part in regime-directed political activity which guides many aspects of national life.'' The system, too, stresses ''the security concerns of society as a whole over safeguards for individuals'' - in other words, a Guinean official said, ''the nation is our prime consideration.'' In practice, the ''nation'' seems to mean the President, for Mr. Toure is perceived as the symbol and incarnation of the party that rules the state that rules the people, in the name of a people who have no opportunity to seek a change in leadership. When the President's name is mentioned in public, people generally applaud. The slogans on the Autoroute Fidel Castro proclaim: ''Ahmed Sekou Toure, Your People Are Proud of You.'' In a stadium, in large letters, is the motto, ''Only One Guide, Ahmed Sekou Toure.'' There are other slogans, too, and one of them seems to imply a philosophers' conundrum. It reads, ''Revolutionary Syndicalism Needs No Slogans.''"
