"To the Editor: The disbursement of $5 million in military aid to Kenya, reported in a Feb. 14 news article, is a sad commentary on the Bush Administration's commitment to human rights. Last July 5, a day after the arrest of human rights lawyers and proponents of multiparty democracy in Kenya, the Bush Administration signed an agreement to deliver $5 million in military aid, which Congress had appropriated for fiscal year 1990, to the Government of President Daniel arap Moi. After large demonstrations for multiparty democracy and protesting the July arrests, Kenyan security forces, according to testimony gathered by Africa Watch, shot and killed as many as 100 demonstrators and arrested many more. Congressional leaders protested the $5 million release, and in late July, the Administration put a freeze on the aid. When the fiscal year 1991 appropriations were enacted, Congress attached human rights conditions to the military component of Kenya's aid, requiring President Bush to certify human rights improvements if Kenya is to receive $15 million in military assistance. The Kenyan Government must charge and try or release all prisoners, including detainees; stop mistreatment of prisoners; restore judiciary independence, and permit freedom of expression. While the fiscal year 1990 $5 million released was not technically subject to those conditions, the signal of appreciation sent to the Moi Government was entirely wrong: human rights in Kenya have deteriorated seriously over the last few months. Kenneth Matiba, a former cabinet minister, has been held without charge or trial for seven months. He is being detained, along with Raila Odinga and Charles Rubia, as a ""threat to the security of the state"" because he advocated restoration of multiparty democracy. In October the Government announced the ""arrest"" in Nairobi of Koigi wa Wamwere, an exiled dissident. He has filed an affidavit in court stating that, rather than having been arrested in Nairobi with a cache of arms, he was abducted by five hooded men from a hotel room in nearby Busia, Uganda, and transported to Nairobi. He states that he was stripped naked and handcuffed so that he had to lie on the floor of a cell covered with human feces in Kenya's Special Branch headquarters. He was denied food and sleep for days at a time and interrogated at gunpoint. He was told that his mother had been arrested and was led to believe that a woman's cries of anguish coming from a nearby cell were hers. Ultimately, he agreed to sign a forced confession implicating other advocates of political pluralism in a plot to overthrow the Kenyan Government. President Moi has used Koigi's ""arrest"" to brand human rights lawyers as subversives. Such practices hardly justify a thank you from the United States. Careful scrutiny for human rights improvements will be required when the Administration prepares to disburse the fiscal year 1991 military aid to Kenya. RICHARD DICKER New York, Feb. 15, 1991 The writer is a lawyer for Africa Watch, which monitors human rights."
