"Denying American suggestions that he was responsible for repeated human rights violations, the Angolan guerrilla leader Jonas Savimbi has said that two killings in his movement in the last year probably resulted from a C.I.A.-supported plot to overthrow him. Mr. Savimbi's statement came in response to a letter from Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d last month demanding that he account for several accusations of killings in his ranks. Administration officials say they give no credence to Mr. Savimbi's assertions of a conspiracy by the Central Intelligence Agency, saying he is displaying his bluster and bad temper. The exchange of letters reflects growing tension between Mr. Savimbi and the United States, which, along with South Africa, subsidized his fight against the formerly Soviet-allied Angolan Government. It also raises doubts about a peace process in Angola that is intended to reach its culmination with multi-party presidential elections on Sept. 29 and 30. Mr. Savimbi is a leading candidate in those elections. Mr. Savimbi has long been admired by conservatives in the United States who espoused the overthrow of Marxist Governments in Angola, Afghanistan and Nicaragua as a way of weakening Moscow. But with the cold war over, Mr. Savimbi, who leads the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, or Unita, is something of an embarrassment to former supporters in the Administration and Congress. The tension between the Angolan leader and the Administration swirls around the reported killing last year of Tito Chingunji, who as Unita's principal representative in Washington in the mid-1980's became a popular figure in Republican circles. Mr. Baker had requested a detailed explanation of Mr. Chingunji's death and of the slaying of his brother-in-law, Wilson dos Santos, another senior Unita leader, and about 10 family members. In his reply, Mr. Savimbi attributed the killings to two members of his movement who defected two months ago and formed their own separatist group in a northern region, Cabinda. He asserted that Mr. Chingunji had plotted to overthrow him in the late 1980's and that his former aide had said his efforts were supported by the C.I.A. ""Certain pieces of circumstantial evidence suggested that Tito's allegations might be true,"" Mr. Savimbi wrote to Mr. Baker, suggesting that such a plot might have been independently backed by lower-level agents. In an effort to bolster his argument, he said a vice president of his movement had been notified by C.I.A. officials in the United States that the agency favored Mr. Chingunji as the sole coordinator of ""Unita's financial and logistical requirements."" This message was said to have been conveyed when Mr. Chingunji was challenging Mr. Savimbi's leadership. ""In retrospect, I regret never having raised the alleged C.I.A. connection with Tito's plan with you,"" Mr. Savimbi wrote. ""We were fearful of damaging the relationship with the U.S.A."" No U.S. Comment on Assertions Asked about Mr. Savimbi's letter, Herman J. Cohen, the Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, said, ""I don't think I better comment on that."" Mark Mansfield, a C.I.A. spokesman, said, ""As a matter of policy, we don't comment on such allegations."" Mr. Savimbi said Mr. Chingunji's and Mr. dos Santos's ultimate goal in 1988 was to form an alliance with the Angolan Government and with elements of Unita ""to overthrow or poison"" him as a way of making peace. A board of inquiry within the guerrilla movement investigated the plot allegations and detained the two leaders early in 1989. But almost three years later, Mr. Savimbi said he had not authorized their killing. A nephew of Mr. Chingunji, Dinho Chingunji, who lives in Washington, said Mr. Savimbi's version of the slayings was ""an outrageous lie."" At the end of his six-page letter to Secretary Baker, Mr. Savimbi asserted that the Luanda Government was breaking the spirit of its cease-fire agreement with Unita by initiating a ""pattern of espionage, bribery, planned assassination and coordinated disinformation revealed by this plot."""
