"Some anti-apartheid activists and members of church congregations have been released from detention in South Africa, according to reports received in the United States yesterday. The reports, from South Africans and human rights monitoring groups, indicated that some of the thousands of people detained in the first days of the emergency decree were being released from suburban police stations because they are considered less dangerous than other detainees. But the authorities continue to prevent contact with most detainees, and security forces continue to look for anti-apartheid activists who have gone into hiding, the sources said. Human rights organizations and church groups in Britain and the United States said contacts with colleagues in South Africa diminished in the last three days. ''The risks to people who give information are much more clear,'' an Amnesty International spokesman, Malc,lm Smart, said in a telephone interview from London. Mr. Smart and South African church sources said access to detainees had been strictly controlled, with few visitors allowed. Those allowed to visit must do so in the presence of a guard, must converse in Afrikaans or English and are not permitted physical contact, the sources said. An envoy of the Archbishop of Canterbury, speaking yesterday at a news conference in London after his return from South Africa, produced what he said was a note from ''an educated professional black male'' being detained. Hunger Strike Reported ''We are on hunger strike,'' the note said, according to the envoy, Terry Waite. ''We are not allowed basic rights, washing, changes of clothes, toilet paper, smoking, even medical treatment. When we try to speak to the station commander about our problems, he doesn't want to listen and takes away one more right.'' Reports reaching London from South African church sources said members of the End Conscription Campaign, a movement urging white youths to refuse military service in the South African Army, were receiving ''adequate'' treatment in detention. In the township of Elsie's River, near Cape Town, about 150 of the 189 people seized at a church service a week ago were released over the weekend, Anglican church officials said. In New York, a spokesman for the World Council of Churches said an Evangelical Presbyterian Church clergyman holding dual citizenship in Switzerland and South Africa had been detained by security forces. The clergyman, the Rev. Jean-Francois Bill, was being held despite South African laws permitting citizens holding British and Swiss passports to enter and leave the country at will, according to the council spokesman, Andrea Cano. Spokesmen for several monitoring groups said they had heard no reports of torture by security forces. Many of those detained in Johannesburg area are being held at the Modderbee prison in Benoni, a town 16 miles east of the city, according to Amnesty International. In Cape Town, women and children are being held at the Pollsmoor Prison, where the black nationalist leader Nelson Mandela is jailed, while men are being imprisoned at Paarl, about 35 miles northeast of the city. In Port Elizabeth, women are being held at the Northend jail and men at St. Albans, sources said."
