"To the Editor: Roger Wilkins is correct in outlining the parallels between the struggles of blacks in the United States and in South Africa (Op-Ed, Feb. 22); however, the divergences may be more telling and revealing. In 1948 apartheid was imposed, and Pretoria suggested that a major reason was that the African National Congress and its allies were no more than the domestic hands of Moscow, and stern measures were required. In 1954 Brown v. Board of Education signalled the beginning of the end for American-style apartheid. That Washington was having difficulty pointing to human rights violations in Eastern Europe when blacks in the Deep South could not vote had a major influence on the process. In 1990, as the cold war recedes and Pretoria finds it more difficult to pose as the lonely bastion against Communism in Africa, Nelson Mandela is released, and in his first public words, he gives thanks not only to the A.N.C. but also to the South African Communist Party and its leader, Joe Slovo. In the United States, however, the leading black organization, the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, fired W.E.B. Du Bois in 1948 in a capitulation to cold war pressures, shunned Paul Robeson and other domestic equivalents of Mr. Mandela, precisely because they were perceived as too far to the left. Only recently, because of wariness about ties to the left of groups like the A.N.C., have the N.A.A.C.P. and other civil rights organizations taken up the anti-apartheid cause. The cold war has come and the cold war has gone while many civil rights organizations still act as if global developments have no impact in this country, while interest rates and economic growth are increasingly influenced by developments in Bonn, Tokyo and elsewhere. Mr. Mandela, on the other hand, pointed to international solidarity as a major reason for his release. Our left allergy has hampered our movement, has provided fertile ground for the anti-Semitic allusions of Louis Farrakhan, Public Enemy and others, and so in 1990 it is possible to be more optimistic about the situation of blacks in South Africa than their American counterparts. This helps account for the emotional outpouring among African-Americans at Mr. Mandela's release. We were subliminally mourning our own lost opportunities. GERALD HORNE Chairman, Black Studies Department, U. of California, Santa Barbara   Santa Barbara, Calif., March 2, 1990"
