"President Jean-Baptiste Bagaza of Burundi was overthrown today by the military leadership while he was out of the country, a communique broadcast by the nation's official radio station said. The announcement comes at a time when, human rights organizations and Western diplomats say, religious and political repression and ethnic discrimination in Burundi have been mounting. The five million people of Burundi, a small country in the heart of Africa, make up one of the poorest nations in the world. Colonel Bagaza, a leftist who seized power 11 years ago, was attending a conference of French-speaking nations in Quebec and left there abruptly for Paris this morning, hours before the coup was announced. He was met in Paris by members of the Burundi Embassy staff and did not speak to reporters. In a Reuters report, Colonel Bagaza was said to have been booked on a plane leaving Paris for Burundi on Friday. He was greeted at the airport by an official of France's Cooperation Ministry, according to the report, and was taken to an airport lounge guarded by policemen. Borders Reported Closed The communique by the state-controlled radio named the country's new leader as Maj. Pierre Buyoya. The broadcast, monitored in Nairobi, said a military committee for national redemption was being set up. The radio said Colonel Bagaza ''is relieved of his duties as head of state, party and army.'' It said all airports and borders had been closed and urged citizens to ''remain calm and maintain peace and security inside the country.'' All members of the Government, the ruling party and the country's judicial council were immediately dismissed, the broadcast said, and Government departments are to be run indefinitely by senior civil servants. Reuters also reported tonight that the Belgian Embassy in Bujumbura, the nation's capital, had said that the city appeared quiet and that the Belgian emigre population was calm. Burundi was ruled by Germany before World War I and administered by Belgium until its independence in 1962. Colonel Bagaza's Government has been criticized by human rights organizations and others who say it has relied on rigged elections, press censorship, police violence, political and religious repression and bans on public meetings to stave off majority rule in his one-party state. Minority Group Rules The ruling ethnic minority are Tutsis, descendants of herdsmen from northern Africa. They account for 15 percent of the population. Colonel Bagaza is Tutsi, as are three-quarters of his Cabinet, three-quarters of the National Assembly, about two-thirds of the university students, 13 of 15 provincial governors, all of the army officers and 96 percent of the enlisted soliders. The majority, Hutus, are generally peasant farmers of southern African Bantu stock. They account for 85 percent of the population in a largely agricultural country that has an annual per capita gross national product of less than $300. It was not clear tonight whether ethnic tensions played a part in the uprising. Defenders of the Government noted in the past that it had abolished ethnic labels on national identity cards and allowed substantial intermarriage between the two groups. They said also that Colonel Bagaza had met with some success in healing deep national scars in Burundi that resulted from one of the worst outbreaks of tribal violence in post-colonial Africa. Several times in the 1960's Hutus made abortive bids to win majority rule. In the last outbreak, in 1972, they killed 2,000 Tutsis, slaying some by cutting off their legs. The Tutsis are tall in stature while the Hutus are shorter. Some 150,000 Slain In revenge, Tutsi policemen and members of the party youth group slaughtered about 5 percent of the Hutus - roughly 150,000 people - including much of the educated Hutu elite. Colonel Bagaza's supporters said that when he assumed power in 1976, overthrowing the Government of Michelle Micombero, he led attempts to heal the wounds of ethnic division. But critics said that the country's tightly controlled political system thinly veiled continuing ethnic divisions. At the same time, Western diplomats in Bujumbura and others have said in recent months that the authorities revealed a deep sense of insecurity by sharpening a campaign to destroy Burundi's Roman Catholic Church. The campaign, in a nation that is 65 percent Catholic, included confiscating the Catholic radio station, shutting the Catholic newspaper, banning the Catholic youth movement and prohibiting religious gatherings without approval. The Government nationalized a nationwide system of Catholic primary and secondary schools and closed a network of Catholic literacy groups. Colonel Bagaza encountered criticism at the Quebec conference this week on both issues. On Wednesday, he was the target of angry demonstrations by a small group of Burundi citizens who accused him of playing a part in the mass killing of Hutus as an army officer in the 1970's. In addition, Le Monde reported today that Prime Minister Jacques Chirac of France had criticized Colonel Bagaza at a private meeting for mistreatment of Catholic missionaries."
