"In a new effort to show a willingness to come to grips with its past, the African National Congress admitted today that it tortured dissident members during its years in exile and said some of those responsible for human rights violations still held posts in the organization. In releasing an internal investigation of abuses at its exile camps in the 1980's and early 1990's, Nelson Mandela, the congress president, who ordered the inquiry last March, said the group's leaders accepted ""collective responsibility"" for the violations. But Mr. Mandela was noncommittal when asked whether individual wrongdoers would be purged from the leadership, as the report strongly recommended, saying that would depend on the outcome of more formal hearings. ""Many of the transgressions committed by the A.N.C. must be understood in the context in which they occurred,"" he said at a news conference. ""Nonetheless, they are inexcusable.  We accept full responsibility for what happened and we will be looking into ways and means to put an end to errors of the past."" Inquiry on Executions The report also called for a further investigation of charges that some prisoners were summarily executed, suggesting that the allegations were credible. It is expected to be seized upon by the congress's critics, especially since the report reopens the question of Mr. Mandela's alliance with the South African Communist Party, which was closely associated with running the exile camps. But congress leaders said their willingness to admit wrongdoing should be considered in contrast to the attitude of the South African Government, which has never accepted responsibility for wrongs committed under apartheid. Although two of the three commission members were prominent African National Congress lawyers, the report, written by Gilbert Marcus, a prominent Johannesburg lawyer not affiliated with the congress, was lacerating in its condemnation of the abuses and in its demand for a stern reckoning. Based on evidence from 25 former detainees as well as congress officials and internal documents, the commission report laid out a pattern of ""staggering brutality,"" forced confessions, and detention for years without trial. African National Congress officials, including Mr. Mandela, have previously admitted that torture took place in the camps in Angola, Uganda and Tanzania where accused traitors and apartheid agents were detained, but the abuses have never been spelled out in such detail. Senior Members Implicated Moreover, Mr. Mandela has suggested in the past that those responsible had been removed from the leadership. The document released today, on the contrary, charges: ""It is clear that several persons against whom serious allegations of brutality have been leveled are currently employed by the A.N.C. in the security department."" Beyond low-ranking officials directly implicated in torture, the report continued, ""There are clearly persons in the senior ranks of the security department who were responsible for the situation in the camps and who should not escape the net of accountability."" ""No person who is guilty of committing atrocities should ever again be allowed to assume a position of power,"" the report concluded. Names of those accused of abuses were delivered to Mr. Mandela but withheld from the public report. Because the congress has demanded disclosure of crimes by the Government, Mr. Mandela was challenged repeatedly by reporters to say whether wrongdoers in his group would be exposed and removed from leadership. ""We have accepted collective responsibility,"" he said. ""The question of individuals is not paramount."" The report credited some officials, including Chris Hani, a former guerrilla leader who now heads the South African Communist Party, with pushing for improvements in the camps in the late 1980's. Lack of Trials, Report Says Although the congress had a code of conduct aimed at distinguishing its detention camps from the prisons of the apartheid regime, in practice the bush warriors often matched their enemy in brutality, according to the report. Detention without trial, the report said, was commonplace and amounted to ""an extreme form of psychological torture."" Most of the former prisoners who gave evidence to the commission were never given a trial, although they were imprisoned for up to seven years. The last known prisoners were freed in August 1991; the investigation found no firm evidence to support sporadic charges that prisoners are still being held, which the congress denies. The report said that during interrogations, prisoners were kicked, whipped, burned and beaten until they confessed. Worst among the detention centers, the report said, was Quatro camp, a prison for suspected enemy agents and dissidents in Angola. ""The inmates, whether convicted of any offense or not, were denigrated, humiliated and abused, often with staggering brutality,"" the report said. Beating rituals included one in which prisoners were forced to puff out their cheeks while being slapped in the face, causing burst eardrums and bleeding from the ears. Other prisoners said they had been suffocated, forced to crawl through poisonous shrubs or colonies of red ants, doused with boiling water and routinely, savagely beaten."
