"THE African National Congress of South Africa was created, 70 years ago last month, to defend Africans against repressive white laws. As the repression grew after the National Party took power in 1948, the A.N.C. moved from gentle protest to rocket attacks on police stations. The Congress was banned in 1960 and its leader, Nelson Mandela, has been serving a life sentence on Robben Island since 1964 for conspiracy to commit sabotage. Organizations devoted to black consciousness - unlike the A.N.C., which has always stood for multiracialism - have appeared. Yet the Congr ess retains a strong hold on the imagination of blacks and its inf luence seems to be growing - it is mentioned at meetings and cro wds sing its songs. In asurvey of blacks in August, The Johannesburg Star reported, 59 percent ''strongly'' liked Mr. Mandela, far m ore than any other person named. The A.N.C.'s president today, Oliver Tambo, who left South Africa in 1960, is a mild-mannered former high school science teacher and law partner of Mr. Mandela. Mr. Tambo, who is 64 years old, lives in Lusaka, Zambia, but travels constantly to marshal support. In the United States last year, he met officers of the Bank of America, Citibank, Manufacturers Hanover, General Motors, Ford and General Electric. Back in New York last month, he replied to questions by Anthony Lewis, a columnist for The New York Times. Excerpts from the interview follow. Question. What should happen now in South Africa? Answer. The most peculiar thing about South Africa is that you have 28 or 29 million people living in the same country - and 24 or 25 million don't exist! They're virtually foreigners in South Africa, without any rights. Immigrants can come from Europe or Latin America and in two years become citizens, participating in rule over people who have been there for generations. That must end. The 25 million must come alive and become part of the country, not part of the animal population - and together with the others take part in running the country without racism. There must be no discrimination. We have been the victims of racism. We would not want anybody else to be such a victim. Our white compatriots have of course missed the experience of being objects of discrimination. They might complain they might want to know what it feels like, but we would deny them that experience. Q. How do you feel about ''black consciousness?'' A. It's a product of white consciousness, a reaction. Much of black consciousness was negative. Q. How much support does the A.N.C. have in South Africa? A. The reports we get from our own people and what we see from outsiders is of a remarkable degree of support, given that we are a proscribed organization. It is surely unusual for an underground organization to evince the kind of support we're seeing: Songs, trade union activity, the way people talk have virtually unbanned us. It's a very encouraging demonstration of people's fearlessness, their determination. It means the A.N.C. is interpreting their aspirations correctly. They identify with the A.N.C. despite the laws of the country. Q. Have you met any American officials during your recent visits here? A. No. I have met senators. Q. What is your view of American policy in Africa, especially the attempt to persuade South Africa to accept independence for Namibia? A. For the United States to project itself as embracing a regime that is hated in most of Africa, in exchange for that Government's behaving rationally and paying some heed to what the whole world thinks about Namibia, is too high a price to pay. In our minds one cannot escape the conclusion that racism itself is being encouraged.  It must be wrong to relate to a racist regime as to an ally. It encourages recalcitrance. You see, South Africa is beginning to believe in the efficacy of defiance. It is more powerful than the United States, which must crawl and cringe to get even some cooperation. So South Africa invades Angola, destroys towns, kills people. Well I mean, everyone must condemn that, but the United States finds excuses. Black people must be excused for thinking that it is somehow all right to kill black children. Imagine if they were white people killed in Angola. So I think we're in trouble. 'Soviet Union Has No Influence' Q. Does that mean you are discouraged? A. No, not discouraged. I am worried. South Africa has managed to make itself a military power. It has its eye on much of southern Africa, as the enemy to be conquered. But if it proceeds on the basis that it can overwhelm the whole of southern Africa, there will be a war of uncontrolled dimensions. The international community would have to intervene. We are not bothered by the strength of South Africa. We don't think they're strong at home. We will prove that on the ground. They can't invade us. But they can invade neighboring countries. Q. What do you say about charges that the A.N.C. is under Communist and Soviet influence? A. The Soviet Union has no influence on the A.N.C., any more than Canada has. What has really happened is that we found ourselves, decades ago, fighting against racism - and relatively weak. We went in search of friends, to Canada, the United States, Europe, India and elsewhere. Some received us well, some were lukewarm, some turned us down. The Soviet Union gave us support. So did other countries - Sweden, fo r example. Sweden gives us assistance without strings except that no funds may be used to buy guns. The Soviet Union does not have to sa y that, because it gives us guns. The supposed stigma of getting as sistance from the Soviet Union has no meaning whatever in southern Af rica. There would be no independence for anyone without those we apons. That's what ordinary people think. Where would we be withoutth at assistance? Could we go to Washington? We are called terrorists. After 70 years, what would anybody do if the response had been murder, torture, life imprisonment? Who is a terrorist? Is it not the person who has been persecuting human beings simply because they are black? We think southern Africa could be a glorious part of the world, with rich cultural values and natural wealth, people moving freely across borders. That kind of southern Africa is of course in the making. It's just a matter of time. We know we have to pay for it in plenty of blood. But it will come."
