"The chairmen of House and Senate subcommittees on Africa said this week that Congress should reduce or suspend United States aid to Liberia in response to reports of human rights violations after a coup attempt and a rigged presidential election. The chairmen, Representative Howard Wolpe, Democrat of Michigan, and Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, said Liberia's head of state, Gen. Samuel K. Doe, should hold new elections and carry out changes to restore confidence in the Government. ''The key question is whether the Government is legitimate in the eyes of the people and whether it can be sustained over time,'' Mr. Wolpe said. ''I don't see it happening. I think there will be continuing unrest and turmoil in that country unless steps are taken to permit fair and free elections. For the U.S. to be closely identified with the Doe regime would be foolish.'' A Disputed Election In October, Congress called for fair and free elections as a condition for continued aid to Liberia, which has been ruled by General Doe since a coup in 1980. After preliminary returns in the Oct. 15 election, opposition leaders asserted that the Liberia Action Party candidate, Jackson F. Doe, who is no relation to the head of state, received about 70 percent of the vote to General Doe's 20 percent. But on Oct. 30, the Election Commission declared General Doe the winner with 50.9 percent. Opponents of the ruling National Democratic Party of Liberia, including former Brig. Gen. Thomas Quiwonkpa, tried a coup on Nov. 12. In the following week, General Quiwonkpa was killed by soldiers loyal to General Doe and many opposition party members were reported detained. J. Emmanuel Bowier, the spokesman for the Liberian Embassy here, said charges of armed insurrection have been filed against 11 civilians, including Jackson Doe, as well as the armed forces commander, Brig. Gen. Morris Zeze, and an undisclosed number of other military personnel. Reports of Rights Violations The State Department called on General Doe to insure that the people who had been detained be given due process and speedy trials. General Doe responded by appointing a new armed forces commander, with instructions to insure fair treatment for the detained. But there have been unconfirmed reports of summary executions of political opponents and of massacres of members of the Gio ethnic group, to which General Quiwonkpa belonged. The Liberian Government has denied these reports, but has not permitted visits to those who have been detained and has barred foreign journalists from entering the country. Liberia's political problems have been compounded by mounting economic disorder. Last week, General Doe announced new economic austerity measures, including layoffs and pay cuts of 25 percent, to help reduce the country's budget deficit of about $40 million. General Doe called on ''Liberia's friends, particularly the United States'' to increase economic assistance, Mr. Bowier said. Liberia, which has a population of about two million, received $77 million in aid from the United States during the last fiscal year. For fiscal 1986, $83 million has been proposed. 'Responsibility' to Cut Aid Mr. Wolpe said an increase in aid would not be ''an appropriate response to human rights violations and arrests of opposition leaders.'' ''I would argue that absent any very serious reform efforts by the Doe regime, the Congressional responsibility would be to reduce or suspend current levels of assistance,'' he said. ''Doe seems to think that he can by coercion maintain control,'' Mr. Wolpe said. ''But he won't be able to transcend to solve the economic problems unless he can handle its political problems.'' Senator Kassebaum said, ''We have to indicate that we are willing to terminate our aid to Liberia if order and responsibility cannot be restored.''"
