"Amnesty International asserted today that 135 nations committed human rights abuses in the last year, ranging from the jailing of draft resisters in Western Europe to the massacre of unarmed civilians in Iraq and the Sudan. The international rights group said its list of offenders, published in an annual survey that was made public today, was the longest it has published since its founding in 1961. It said it uncovered abuses in more than 80 percent of the 159 countries that belong to the United Nations. But the organization said it was encouraged by the emergence of 1,000 human rights groups around the world in recent years and by the spread of laws to protect the rights of prisoners. 'People Are Locked Away' ''In at least half the countries of the world, people are locked away for speaking their minds, often after trials that are no more than a sham,'' the Amnesty International report said. It criticized the United States, where 25 convicted criminals were put to death last year, for the execution of John Brogdon, a man diagnosed as mentally retarded, and Edward Earl Johnson, despite ''substantial doubts'' about his guilt. Amnesty International opposes the death penalty. The report said that in China, more than 200 convicted criminals were known to have been put to death, but that the number represented ''only a fraction of the total number of death sentences and executions'' that were believed to have been carried out. The report said that 760 political prisoners were reported executed in 39 countries in 1987, but that the number probably was much higher because of secret executions. It said inquiries by India, Britain and Israel into abuses were kept secret or whitewashed. The group said that Turkey, Czechoslovakia and East Germany hid violations, and that China, Haiti, Syria and South Africa clamped down on the reporting of abuses by denying prisoners access to lawyers or families. Among abuses cited were reports that Sudanese forces massacred hundreds of unarmed Dinka tribespeople; that Iraq executed hundreds of unarmed Kurds; the disappearance of hundreds of Peruvian farmers seized by the Government, and court-ordered executions in South Africa and Iran. Spain was cited for reportedly torturing Basque separatist prisoners, Britain for failing to publish a police inquiry into the killings of six unarmed Irish Republican Army guerrillas in 1982, and France, Italy, Austria, Greece, Malta, Norway and Switzerland for jailing draft resisters. Executions and Jailings Iran executed at least 158 people, ''although the true number was probably higher,'' and 164 people were hanged in South Africa's Pretoria Central Prison, the group said. The Soviet Union released 259 prisoners, most of them prisoners of conscience, the report said. But nearly 200 were pardoned under secret decrees that falsely implied that they were criminals and that ''hid the fact that they had been unjustly imprisoned in the first place,'' the report said. A copy of the report can be obtained by sending $10 to Amnesty International U.S.A., 322 Eighth Ave., New York, N.Y., 10001. Checks should be payable to Amnesty International U.S.A. An additional $1.25 should be included for postage and handling. Copies of the report can be picked up at the group's New York office."
