"In what will be an early test of human-rights policy under the Bush Administration, American and Liberian rights campaigners say they plan to seek restrictions on American aid to Liberia, America's oldest and closest ally in Africa. Angered by a series of unexplained deaths, newspaper closings and political trials, the rights campaigners assert that the United States should push forcefully for more freedom and democracy in the West African nation, which was created 141 years ago as a republic for freed American slaves. ''Liberia's human-rights performance does not warrant the release of more aid money,'' Amos C. Sawyer, executive director of the Assocation for Constitutional Democracy in Liberia, said in a telephone interview from Washington. In late November, Dr. Sawyer testified before the United States Trade Representative in favor of a petition to revoke Liberia's preferential tariff status. Liberia was the only African country submitted for such review this year. U.S. Assets in Liberia Next year, Liberia is to be one of four African countries scheduled for study by Africa Watch, a new human-rights group based in New York, a staff member said. The other countries are Ethiopia, Kenya, and Somalia. ''There is a serious, ongoing human-rights crisis in Liberia,'' said Michael H. Posner, executive director of another New York-based group, Lawyers Committee for Human Rights. ''It will be a test of the Bush Administration's human-rights policy.'' In response, Liberian officials said the new Administration should not forget America's unique concentration of assets in the African nation: $500 million in private investment, a powerful Voice of America radio transmitter, communications equipment to relay diplomatic cables between Africa and Washington, and landing rights for American military planes on 24-hour notice. In an interview, Liberia's Vice President, Harry F. Moniba, said that Americans often demand a higher level of human-rights adherence from Liberia than from other third-world countries. Unlike most countries in West Africa, Mr. Moniba said, Liberia has independent newspapers and opposition political parties. Congress Links Cuts to Abuses No human-rights group objected, he said, when three soldiers put rifles to his head and ordered him to speak on national radio in a 1985 coup attempt. ''We have a Government that some people have elected to hate and to do anything and everything to get removed,'' he said. But the United States Congress has cited the human-rights record of the Liberian head of state, Gen. Samuel K. Doe, as a reason for cutting aid to Liberia to $31 million this year, from $77 million in 1985. Disbursement of $10 million of this year's amount has been suspended pending certification by Secretary of State George P. Shultz that Liberia's human-rights situation is improving. This year, aid to Liberia from the European Community surpassed aid from the United States for the first time. #2 Newspapers Closed ''One-third of American assistance is conditioned,'' an American diplomat in Washington said, arguing in favor of maintaining aid levels. ''What is left is food aid, education aid and primary health care. The sting that remains to be delivered to the Liberian Government is marginal or approaching zero.'' But a series of incidents here this year may have further weakened Liberia's case in Washington. In April, Joseph R. Kaipaye, a Liberian who lived in the United States for many years, died after police interrogation at Mr. Doe's executive mansion. Liberian authorities said Mr. Kaipaye helped plot a coup and committed suicide by jumping out a sixth-floor window of the mansion. When Liberia's news agencies published skeptical reports about the alleged coup plot, Mr. Doe closed two of the newspapers, Suntimes and Footprints Today. In October, at the coup-plot trial, a former presidential candidate, Gabriel Kpolleh, and nine other Liberians were convicted and sentenced to 10 years in jail. 'Invasion Force' Assertions In July, Joseph Momoh, President of neighboring Sierra Leone, accused Liberian soldiers of torturing several Sierra Leoneans and shooting one to death in the basement of the Executive Mansion. Mr. Doe denied the accusation. In this year's most serious incident, General Doe went on national radio on July 13 to announce that Liberian soldiers had halted an ''invasion force'' in ''an exchange of gunfire.'' In that purported coup plot, the dead included Brig. Gen. J. Nicholas Podier, once second in command of General Doe's Government. But, in interviews, two survivors of General Podier's 10-member ''invasion'' group said that the entire group was captured alive. Curtis Elmer Williams, an American businessman who was captured with the group, said in a telephone interview from his home in Jersey City, ''No one was killed or wounded at the time of arrest.'' Several Liberians interviewed here expressed skepticism that Washington would sacrifice its waning leverage here for human rights."
