"A 26-year-old man with no criminal record is picked up by the police while driving near his home. He is not allowed to contact anyone, even his wife, whom he married the day before. He spends the next eight years in jail, without trial. That was the experience of Joseph Odogu, who was accused of armed robbery in the summer of 1980. Inexplicably, month after month, his trial date was postponed. And because he was arrested under a special decree enacted by Nigeria's military Government, he could not be freed on bail. ''It was a horrid, horrendous, dehumanizing situation,'' said Olisa Agbakoba, Mr. Odogu's lawyer and chairman of the Lagos-based Civil Liberties Organization. ''And while he wasted in jail, his car was stolen, his shop was ransacked, his landlord chucked him out, his mother died and his wife deserted him.'' What Mr. Agbakoba soon discovered after taking on Mr. Odogu's case last year was that his client had fallen through the cracks of Nigeria's often harsh and byzantine legal system. Prosecutors, in fact, decided within months of Mr. Odogu's arrest that he was the wrong man. But no one bothered to tell him, his jailers or the courts. He was released last fall and awarded $266 as compensation for his wrongful detention. Many Cases Documented Mr. Odogu's case may seem especially cruel, but Mr. Agbakoba says it is only one of hundreds of such accounts of desperation in various police cells and detention centers across Nigeria. Since it was formed two years ago, the Civil Liberties Organization has documented a continuous stream of cases illustrating shortcomings in Nigeria's judicial and law enforcement systems. Sometimes, as in Mr. Odogu's case, the problems are caused by sloppy police work, albeit on a grand scale. Increasingly, however, the group has uncovered alarming evidence of widespread human rights violations. In the first six months of 1988, for example, the group disclosed that 54 detainees in a single federal prison here died while awaiting trial; that the Government does not dispute. In another instance, the group recently brought a class-action lawsuit challenging the incarceration of 70 prisoners who had been detained without trial for periods of 3 to 10 years. So far, 20 have been released. ''We've been very impressed with their work, especially because they've done most of it on their own, sacrificing their own funds, and not gettting any outside support,'' Almami I. Cyllah, Africa coordinator for Amnesty International in Washington, said in a telephone interview. ''They're the first, as far as I know, to set up such an organization in Africa.'' A Grim Island Prison Indeed, until last month the group operated out of Mr. Agbakoba's law office. Its shoestring budget consists mostly of donations from the general public and, most crucial, the free services of about 100 lawyers and other volunteers. The group's crusade gathered force last December when local newspapers became transfixed by the story of Ita Oko Island, a prison colony secretly established a decade ago during the military regime of Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo. Accessible only by boat or helicopter, the island was, in the words of one newspaper, ''a jailer's dream.'' There were no telephones, no way to obtain medical care and, of course, no lawyers. Once consigned there, inmates were completely at the mercy of their jailers. When Mr. Agbakoba got the first whiff of the story, he rented a boat and got as close to the island as he could. 'It was just horrendous,'' he said. ''It was full of crocodiles, snakes, huge reptiles and, from what I was told, quicksand.'' By enlisting the aid of friends in the press, the group exposed what had been a tightly held military secret. ''Ita Oko is the kind of place that even the most cynical Nigerian would never have associated with his country,'' one newspaper, The Guardian, said in an editorial. ''That it could exist for so long, far removed from public consciousness and view, is damning evidence of the frightening shortcomings of our penal policy.'' Two of Group Are Jailed The Government reacted almost immediately to the reports by removing all the prisoners and shutting down the colony. In most regards, however, Mr. Agbakoba and other members of his group here walk the fine line between social work, which is grudgingly tolerated by the military Government, and political advocacy, which is not. In January, after the group released its second report on human rights here, Mr. Agbakoba and Clement Kwankwo, the group's secretary, were jailed for five days. One recent afternoon in the quiet of his strikingly modern law chambers, Mr. Agbakoba elaborated on his views of Nigerian society. The 36-year old London-trained lawyer said he had no ''ideological or political agenda.'' ''The fact is that Nigeria is a developing country, and that's where a lot of our problems come from,'' Mr. Agbakoba said. ''That's the reason why traffic does not move, the reason why you don't have water, the reason why you don't have a regular power supply. You can't expect the police to be superefficient against that background.'' Long Rule by Soldiers More worrisome, however, is the fact that soldiers have ruled this country for 19 of the last 23 years. ''The problem is that it's the one who can shoot his way into power that becomes the head of government,'' Mr. Agbakoba said. ''And not being schooled in the finer point of law, they alway come in and say, 'We'll solve the problem with a hard stick.' '' Not all Nigerians are enamored of the group's crusade. Asked to comment, Yusufu Mamman, a spokesman for the military Government, said: ''We have nothing to hide. We have no history of political detention - even the former government officials who were overthrown were released - and we have a timetable for a return to democracy, so what on earth do these people want?'' When told of Mr. Mamman's remarks, Mr. Agbakoba said: ''That's just ignorant, stupid. He doesn't know what he's talking about. The fact is, if someone has been in prison for upward of 10 years without trial, I don't see how anyone can come and say that what we're doing, trying to get them free, is not the right thing.''"
