"Former supporters of Unita, the United States-backed Angolan guerrilla movement, have asserted that the group's leader, Jonas Savimbi, has ordered the torture and killing of high-ranking dissenters in his ranks over many years. The accusations come as an estimated 50,000 Cuban troops are preparing to leave Angola over the next three years under a regional peace accord signed in December. Mr. Savimbi's 26,000-member group has been battling the Soviet-supported Angolan Government since the nation became independent from Portugal in 1975, when China was Unita's principal backer Under the peace accord, South Africa agreed to stop its assistance to Unita, the intials in Portuguese for the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola. The United States has given Unita at least $15 million a year in aid in the last few years. Witnesses have told Amnesty International, the human rights organization, that Mr. Savimbi has had opponents accused of being ''witches'' and then burned in bonfires at public rallies. One entire family, including three children aged 7 to 15, is said to have been killed this way in Jamba, Mr. Savimbi's military headquarters in southern Angola, in September 1983. Isaias Samakuva, the Unita representative in London, dismissed the claims today as ''disinformation'' inspired by the Government in Angola. Joao Soares, a leading member of the Portuguese Socialist Party and a longtime Unita supporter, also said he had doubts about the motives behind some of the charges. Politically, the most damaging of the accusers is Fred Bridgland, a British journalist who has long portrayed Mr. Savimbi as the leader of a free, independent and democratic anti-Communist movement deserving of Western support. Mr. Bridgland is expected to denounce the guerrilla leader as a repressive totalitarian on a program to be broadcast on London's Independent Television Network Saturday evening. Gillian Nevins, a researcher for Amnesty International, said: ''We have reports of well known Unita officials being extra-judicially executed. Unita has denied these claims. We also have reports of military people on the Government side going into areas and torturing, sometimes killing and executing people, but we have been unable to confirm them.'' Mr. Bridgland was led to break with Mr. Savimbi by his belief that Unita's former Washington representative, Tito Chingunji, has been detained in Jamba against his will since November. Mr. Bridgland said: ''Tito Chingunji failed to return as scheduled from Jamba in November. I have evidence that Savimbi put him before a kangaroo court, accusing him of witchcraft and plotting a coup against him.'' ''He denied the charges, but was later tortured to confess,'' Mr. Bridgland said. Congressman Questions Report In Washington, Representative Dan Burton, Republican of Indiana, said he met with Mr. Chingunji in February in Angola. ''If he was dead or being held against his will, I think I would have been able to tell,'' Mr. Burton said in a telephone interview from his home in Indianapolis. Mr. Chingunji was also made available to see Mr. Bridgland on his last visit to Jamba. Contacted in London, Mr. Bridgland declined to go into the details of the encounter, but he had earlier described the meeting to Jonathan Kwitny, an American journalist who is preparing a program on Mr. Savimbi for ''The Kwitny Report,'' a television program syndicated on the Public Broadcasting System. Mr. Chingunji ''was presented to me as a free man,'' Mr. Bridgland told Mr. Kwitny, ''but he was surrounded by 13 members of the Politburo and it was clear to me that he was in a hostage situation.'' The British journalist went on to say that he himself was then put on trial for three hours by a ''kangaroo court'' and ''terrorized'' for expressing his misgivings about Mr. Chingunji's condition. Ms. Nevins said her organization had also received reports that Mr. Chingunji had been arrested and mistreated, but had not been able to confirm them independently. Unita representatives here said Mr. Chingunji left Washington in November, was promoted to be a deputy secretary general of the movement and has therefore remained in Jamba. He was seen there recently by an American Congressional delegation, they said. Mr. Bridgland and a group of students who fled Angola and have now obtained political asylum in Scandinavia have said Mr. Savimbi is also detaining Wilson dos Santos, another Unita diplomat who is related by marriage to Mr. Chingunji. Officials Said to Disappear They also said other senior Unita officials had disappeared and were believed to have been killed on orders from Mr. Savimbi. They said the victims included Mr. Chingunji's parents, Mr. and Mrs. Jonatao Chingunji, and the former Unita military chief of staff, Jose Alberto Chendovava. Mr. Samakuva, the Unita representative here, said the elder Mr. Chingunji had died of natural causes. As for Mr. Chendovava, he said: ''The chief of staff was on the way to a strategy meeting in Mavinga called by Dr. Savimbi. He got out of the truck at 4 o'clock in the morning, just outside the post, and slipped and fell under the wheel after telling the driver to move on and trying to swing back up onto the vehicle. He died two hours later.'' The students who have fled - Dias Kanombo, Andre Yamba Yamba and Ermelindo Kanjungu - first made their charges in Lisbon last May. They said that they had decided to investigate Mr. Savimbi's practices after seeing some disturbing sights in Jamba, and that they collected evidence for two years. They said they presented their findings in a collectively edited document to the Unita leadership last year, with a demand for change, but were denounced as traitors, so they made their findings public instead. Mr. Kanjungu, 22 years old, is the son of a prominent Unita official still in Jamba. In the document, he said he saw the public beating of three officials accused of disloyalty to Mr. Savimbi when he attended Unita's fifth congress at Chingunjangu, near Mavinga, in 1982. One of them was the group's foreign affairs chief, Tony Fernandes, who he said was saved from death only by the intervention of friends. Report of Family's Burning On Sept. 7, 1983, Mr. Kanjungu said, he witnessed the burning on a bonfire of an entire family accused of witchcraft, in the presence of Mr. Savimbi and hundreds of people. Each person present, he said, was told to bring logs to the pyre, and then the accused were brought in, tied to poles. Some tried to escape the flames at the last moment but were thrown back, he said. Mr. Kanjungu identified the victims as Joao Kalitangue, a nurse; his wife, Isabel, a kindergarten teacher; their three children, and a 12-year-old nephew. Mr. Kanjungu said a woman called Aurora Katalaio and her two children, one of whom was 7 years old, had also been burned to death. Mr. Kanjungu asserted that Mr. Savimbi had said, ''The party is not going to support the children of witches.'' According to Amnesty International, Joao Kalitangue had been accused of plotting against Mr. Savimbi's life, while Aurora Katalaio, who had studied psychology in Switzerland, was the widow of a senior Unita official, Mateus Katalaio, who has disappeared. The students believe Mr. Savimbi had him executed. Mr. Samakuva, the London representative of Unita, said Mr. Katalaio was killed in combat in Lubango in 1982. He also dismissed the account of the burnings as an invention by Unita's enemies. ''Burning witches is a common process in Africa,'' he said, ''unless the authorities prevent it, and we do in the areas under our control.'' Interviewed in Sweden Dias Kanombo, one of the students, now ekes out a living as a writer in Sweden, where he agreed to talk with a reporter this week after trusted intermediaries abroad relayed messages to him through a post office box. ''Savimbi is not the originator of these practices in Africa, nor is he a barbarian,'' Mr. Kanombo said. ''He is a leader caught between modern political ideas and African traditional practices. To eliminate the opposition is a Leninist practice, a Stalinist practice.'' ''The same practices are common on the M.P.L.A. side, including the killing of witches,'' he said, using the Portuguese initials of the Government party, the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola. WASHINGTON, March 10 (Special to The New York Times) - Representative Burton speaking of his meeting with Mr. Chingunji In February, said of him: ''He was on two legs and walking around. I have it on videotape.'' Mr. Burton visited Angola with three other House members. He said Mr. Chingunji had been introduced to them as a leader of Unita. A State Department spokesman said the United States had no information confirming the charges by former supporters of Unita. Experts on southern Africa said the rumors about mistreatment of dissident members of the guerrilla group had come from many sources and could not be dismissed out of hand, but had not been confirmed. An article on March 11 about allegations of human rights violations by the Angola guerrilla movement led by Jonas Savimbi inaccurately described statements by Fred Bridgland, a British journalist. Mr. Bridgland said he had evidence that Tito Chingunji, an official of the guerrilla movement, had been accused of witchcraft and of plotting against Mr. Savimbi and that screams had been heard from a hut to which Mr. Chingunji had been confined; he did not say Mr. Chingunji had been tortured. The fate of another official of the movement, Wilson dos Santos, was described by Angolan refugees in Scandinavia, not by Mr. Bridgland."
