"Three United States Senators have told the Kenyan Government, once one of Washington's favorite aid recipients in Africa, that because of its poor human rights record it would not receive its usual military aid next year. In another sign of displeasure, the Senators made clear during their visit here this week that unlike some other African countries, Kenya would not share in the more than $200 million in increased economic development aid that Congress made available for the continent in the foreign aid bill adopted this month. Despite warnings from Western donors and the World Bank that aid to Africa would be increasingly tied to liberalization, Kenya, under the leadership of President Daniel arap Moi, has remained steadfastly opposed to political pluralism. Three well-known advocates of a multiparty system have been imprisoned and kept in solitary confinement without charges since July. More than 80 people have been charged with sedition for the possession of political cassettes and publications, and about 50 people have been charged ""with breach of the peace"" since the political crackdown. Four people were charged with treason last month.  Four Conditions Set Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, and chairman of the Senate Appropriations Committee's foreign operations subcommittee, said here that under the terms of the foreign aid bill President Bush had to certify that Kenya was meeting four conditions to receive $15 million in military aid. The conditions were these: to charge and try or release all prisoners, including political detainees; to stop mistreatment of prisoners; to restore the independence of the judiciary, and to restore freedom of expression. The other members of the visiting delegation were Senators Al Gore, Democrat of Tennessee, and Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland. Apparently in a gesture to donors, Mr. Moi said last week that his Government would introduce a bill in Parliament to restore the tenure of judges, the Attorney General and the Auditor General. The independence of the judiciary, which had been part of the Kenya Constitution since 1963, was removed in 1988, the same time that the secret ballot in primary elections was dispensed with. Freedom for Detainees From the tone of the message Mr. Leahy delivered at a news conference and comments by officials at the United States Embassy here, it seemed unlikely that the restoration of an independent judiciary alone would be sufficient. Implicit was the expectation that the Kenyan authorities would have to release or charge the three political detainees, Kenneth Matiba, Charles Rubia and Raila Odinga. President Moi was in Japan, the biggest donor of aid to Kenya, during the Congressional visit but the reaction of the Vice President and Finance Minister, George Saitoti, was a version of what Mr. Moi has been saying for the last several months: that Kenya will not change its ways because donors demand it. ""Kenyans will not allow themselves to be dictated as to what changes to undertake,"" Mr. Saitoti said in Parliament to the stamping of feet in approval. ""We shall not do anything to appease anybody."" Last year, Kenya was appropriated $15 million in American military aid but received only $10 million because the remaining $5 million was canceled after the imprisonment of the three politicians in July. Congress approved $25 million for economic development aid and $14 million for food aid for the coming year, about the same amounts as Kenya received in 1990. Other African countries, notably Mozambique and newly independent Namibia, received increases in their aid, not only because of obvious need from war and famine, but also as rewards for introducing measures permitting a multiparty system. Increasingly economically strapped because it is entirely dependent on imported oil, Kenya lost $20 million in aid from Norway when President Moi cut off diplomatic relations last month in a dispute over a Kenyan exile arrested on treason charges. The Danish Government has announced it will cut its aid of $35 million by one quarter because of unhappiness with Kenya's rights record."
