"To the Editor: Growing international disapproval of apartheid has isolated South Africa from the rest of the world in a way analogous to the position of the South before the American Civil War. The antebellum South copuld not extricate itself from a slave system that had gone out of date elsewhere. Captive of its history, it had no solution save to fight and lose the bloodiest war the world had ever known. There is in South Africa's apartheid, too, much history that needs to be understood if apartheid is to be dismantled without violence. To begin, apartheid is not a new phenomenon that appeared only at the end of world War II. It goes back more than 300 years to 1652, when the first Dutch settlers arrived at the site of Cape Town. Within a couple of years, the Dutch had instituted ''separate development'' by planting a hedge to keep out the indigenous population. Chattel slavery and a form of serfdom soon followed; pass laws appeared at the beginning of the 19th century; ''native'' reserves for African residence were first established in the 1840's. Independence for the Union of South Africa in 1910 effectively disenfranchised the African population. This was soon followed by legislation establishing segregation in jobs, urban residence and freedom of movement, as well as land ownership and occupation. Black workers were systematically harassed by parliamentary act and police action. Widespread social segregation by custom and law was exemplified by the 1927 act outlawing interracial intimacy. The objective was political, social and economic segregation. South Africa's long-lived apartheid emerged from social attitudes brought by early European settlers, who regarded African customs as barbaric; hence, social superiority and then racial superiority came to be marked by skin color. Prejudice was reinforced by a Calvinist faith that tended to interpret predestination on racial lines, by a widespread feeling of isolation among pioneer frontiersmen struggling for survival in a wilderness of wild beast and primitive people. These attitudes bred a fierce sense of group loyalty within the Afrikaner people, a self-esteem that was further intensified by British colonial restraints during the 19th century. Such sentiments are very much alive today. The Afrikaner sees himself isolated in a hostile world, the protector of a Western civilization that has been abandoned by an effete Euroe, surviving under siege, determined never to capitulate. External pressures like international censure can only intensify the mentality of the laager, the camp within a circle of wagons' yet it is clear that, like the South's antebellum slavery, apartheid is a system whose day has passed. One can scarcely imagine the Afrikaner Government voluntarily sharing power with blacks. Nevertheless, a way must be found to avoid the fate that befell the American South. This will require statesmanship of a high order from black and white, both within South Africa and throughout the wider world. Robert W. July New York, Aug. 1, 1985 The writer is professor of history at Hunter College and the City University Graduate School."
