"To the Editor: Your May 26 report on riots in Nigeria states that the military Government is intent on restoring order and is exercising a tightly controlled transition to civilian rule. However, you do not note that the Nigerian Government's response to the unrest is still another example of the unlawful and harsh measures taken throughout this lengthy transition. The Nigerian Government has consistently justified its draconian decrees to suppress critics as necessary for the transition to democracy. Since coming into power, the Government has passed military decrees that suspend fundamental constitutional rights, including freedom of speech and association. It has established a parallel system of courts with military personnel sitting with judges and has instituted indefinite detention without trial, all in the name of democracy. The creation of a new national guard is a disturbing development in this pattern, particularly since a report just released by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights found that Nigerian law enforcement officials have been given wide latitude to act with impunity. Our report documents numerous human rights violations committed by the Nigerian police force, including extrajudicial executions and torture. The Government has also harassed and intimidated those who have criticized its human rights violations. In particular, Nigeria's human rights community has come under sharp attack. The Government seized on the recent unrest as an opportunity to target the human rights community. On May 19, security and police officials arrested three human rights activists, Beko Ransome Kuti, Femi Falana and Baba Omojola. None have been charged, and their whereabouts remain unknown. On May 21, the Nigerian police force ransacked the offices of the Civil Liberties Organization in Lagos and in Kaduna. If the military Government is truly committed to the rule of law, as it proclaims, then it must end police violence, prosecute those who are responsible for human rights violations and stop using arbitrary arrest, detention without trial and excessive force to suppress the freedoms of speech and association. Moreover, it must permit the human rights community to do its work without intimidation. BINAIFER NOWROJEE Africa Program Director, Lawyers Committee for Human Rights New York, May 29, 1992"
