"To the Editor: In ''Hero Hunger'' (editorial, June 24), you seem to take me to task for a remark I made to Nelson Mandela on Ted Koppel's ''Town Meeting'' on television, in which I described as amoral Mr. Mandela's reluctance to criticize the human rights records of Yasir Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organization, Libya's Muammar el-Qaddafi and Cuba's Fidel Castro. You concede that Mr. Mandela ''is least persuasive in explaining his tributes to Yasir Arafat's P.L.O., Libya and Cuba.'' Nevertheless, you maintain that ''those who reject Mr. Mandela's view as amoral need to recall beleaguered Israel, too, has felt that survival justified selling arms to South Africa.'' Your reminder is misplaced. First, I did not question Mr. Mandela's acceptance of the support offered him by the P.L.O., Libya and Cuba. I questioned Mr. Mandela's refusal to criticize the human rights record of his benefactors. Israel has never hesitated to condemn South Africa's apartheid policies and has voted consistently in the United Nations for resolutions and sanctions against South Africa's racist regime. More to the point, the African National Congress has criticized Israel for dealing with South Africa. Apparently, the African National Congress does expect Israel to intervene in the internal affairs of its benefactors. It would not accept an Israeli argument of being too preoccupied with its own struggle for survival to intervene in South Africa's internal affairs. Finally, I and the many American Jews and Israelis who share my view have not hesitated to apply the same standard to Israel that we asked of Mr. Mandela. When asked about Israel's military contacts with South Africa on New York's public television station WNYC, Channel 31, the night before the Koppel program, I said, ''The short answer is that it is wrong, and that it must stop.'' I write not only to defend the term amoral for a policy that grants immunity from criticism to those who support the A.N.C., but also to dispel the notion that the Jewish community may harbor an unfriendliness to Mr. Mandela or to his cause, for the contrary is the case. To be sure, we do not share Mr. Mandela's enthusiasm for Yasir Arafat, Muammar el-Qaddafi and Fidel Castro. But then, neither do most Americans. On the other hand, we have not asked Mr. Mandela and the A.N.C. to adopt our enemies as their enemies, as he seemed to suggest on the Koppel program and as you reported. We understand his sense of indebtedness to those who supported his struggle when he was abandoned by much of the world. And with but few exceptions, the Jewish community understands the support Mr. Mandela has expressed for Palestinian self-determination. Indeed, many Israelis and many American Jews agree with that position. Israel's delegate to the United Nations, Johanan Bein, said following Mr. Mandela's speech at the United Nations that Israel considers him a friend and a supporter of Israel's right to live with secure borders. That Mr. Mandela is a friend of the Jewish people was made abundantly clear by his comments to us when we met with him in Geneva, and again during Mr. Koppel's television program. His expression of gratitude for the support he received over the years from Jewish colleagues and from the Jewish community was deeply moving. Clearly, there are significant aspects of the Arab-Israeli conflict about which we and Mr. Mandela and the A.N.C. disagree. But Mr. Mandela is visiting the United States not to solve the conflict in the Middle East, but to urge Americans to maintain the struggle against the evil of apartheid in South Africa. In that struggle, he will continue to have a strong and dependable ally in the American Jewish community. HENRY SIEGMAN Executive Director American Jewish Congress   New York, June 26, 1990"
