"Congress battled President Reagan and won legislation to impose sanctions against South Africa in hopes of ending apartheid. But if we are genuinely concerned about helping South Africans to achieve racial justice without creating large-scale bloodshed, economic deprivation and political oppression, we must now face squarely the nature of an organization widely regarded as the legitimate voice of black South African protest: the African National Congress. The view of the A.N.C. as the South African equivalent of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s Southern Christian Leadership Conference is a tragic mistake. In recent decades, the A.N.C. has become dominated by leaders voicing strident Leninism, an ideology they have sought to implement by terrorism and murder -largely against blacks, so far. Consider recent statements by various A.N.C. leaders. About two months ago, ''Radio Freedom,'' the A.N.C.'s Ethiopia-based station, carried a statement from Joe Modise, commander of the military wing of the A.N.C., that makes quite clear the organization's terrorist orientation. Black South Africans, he said, should ''organize themselves into groups, and policemen should be ambushed and their weapons taken; bombs and petrol bombs should be made from locally available materials.'' The people should ''identify collaborators and enemy agents and deal with them.'' It is important to remember that the police he talked about are, mostly, blacks, as are the ''collaborators'' -the A.N.C.'s characterization of blacks who oppose its program. The method of ''dealing with'' such ''collaborators'' is to place rubber tires soaked in gasoline over their heads and set them alight. The devices are known as a ''necklaces.'' Lest one thinks such tactics are approved only by extremists within the military wing of the A.N.C., listen to Winnie Mandela, wife of the jailed former A.N.C. leader, Nelson Mandela, who spoke at Munsieville on April 13: ''Together, hand in hand with our boxes of matches and our necklaces, we shall liberate this country.'' Mrs. Mandela is sometimes compared to Coretta Scott King. Her Munsieville statement demonstrates the monstrous inaccuracy of the comparison. The ruthlessness of the A.N.C. is perhaps best demonstrated by Johnny Makatini, the organization's representative at the United Nations, who recently said that ''if there were only four million of us left after the revolution, that would be better than the present situation.'' He alludes here with indifference to the possibility of deaths of 17 million South African blacks. This cruel and cold-blooded indifference to suffering and death is incompatible with Dr. King's deeply humane vision. Mr. Makatini is prepared to destroy black South Africa in order to save it. These statements foreshadow the sort of government the A.N.C. would install once in power. They who strive to rule through terror usually rule by terror. Moses Mabhida, an A.N.C. executive council member, put the organization on record in support of the most brutal tactics: ''We express our full solidarity with the Afghanistan People's Democratic Party - we fully understand and support the timely assistance of the Soviet Union.'' This is not mere casual support for the Soviet Union. The African National Congress has been perfectly frank about the economic and political policies it would adopt if in power. Mrs. Mandela was quoted by Pravda as saying: ''The Soviet Union is the torchbearer for all our hopes and aspirations. In Soviet Russia, genuine power of the people has been transformed from dreams into reality.'' The best that can be said about this statement is that it reflects a terribly dangerous naivete. The worst is that Mrs. Mandela wishes to impose on fellow South Africans a dictatorship as brutal as that imposed by Moscow on the Ethiopians and the Afghans. A Soviet-style dictatorship would deny basic human rights to South Africans of all colors and destroy what is now the most dynamic economy in Africa, creating in its place an economy like those that keep the rest of Africa in desperate poverty and drive millions of blacks to seek work in South Africa. When Americans demand that the South African Government share power with the African National Congress, they demand power-sharing with an organization committed to terror, oppression and poverty. The blacks of South Africa will not find a better life under an A.N.C. dictatorship. We would be better advised to support the claims of proved democratic opponents of apartheid, such as Chief Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, leader of six million Zulus, and Bishop Isaac Mokoena, leader of millions of blacks in the Reformed Independent Church Association. In this direction alone lies hope."
