"What is happening in South Af-rica has to be understood as something more than another turn in the cycle of protest and repression. The illegitimacy of a political system has finally caught up with it. There can be no return to normalcy in Pretoria's sense, meaning government by and for the white minority. The crisis can be resolved only by the establishment of a new legitimacy. A system that denied 80 percent of the people all political rights because of their skin color never rested on the consent of the governed, of course. It rested on force. But the rulers could count on most blacks to bear the abuse without violent reaction most of the time. They can no longer. They govern only by what amounts to an army of occupation in the black townships. In the past, moreover, rulers hid the illegitimate reality of the system from themselves, and tried to hide it from others, by elaborate theories: racial purity, separate development, ''independent'' homelands. Now those myths are threadbare. The world sees racism for what it is. The apartheid system's reliance on force becomes ever more naked. In the last 10 months the South African police have killed nearly 500 black men, women and children. Many were simply mowed down, as in the massacre at Uitenhage in March. The sweeping powers of the police to arrest and detain anyone suspected of political unorthodoxy have been used to take in hundreds of leaders of the United Democratic Front, which advocates a nonracist South Africa. One of the prominent leaders of the movement against apartheid, Mathew Goniwe, was found dead, his body mutilated, in circumstances pointing to the police as the murderers. The brutality has been matched by the cynicism of Pretoria's rhetoric, offering excuses with no serious expectations of belief. It was all the fault of Communists, officials said when they imposed the state of emergency last week. ''It is essential,'' President P. W. Botha said, ''that the situation be normalized in such a way that the climate for continued dialogue in the interests of all people in the constitutional, economic and social fields is ensured.'' That from a head of government who has had no ''dialogue'' whatever with meaningful representatives of 23 million black people. No, the time has passed for those empty political phrases, for those Government promises of ''reforms'' that never touch the essentials of the apartheid system. This time must see a realistic hope of what blacks would call change: a chance to take part in the political life of their country. For that there must be real talking - not a mythical dialogue, not a chat with blacks chosen by the white Government, but a negotiation between blacks and whites who matter. And that comes back to the crucial point of legitimacy. South African blacks, as polls have repeatedly shown, overwhelmingly regard one man as their legitimate representative. That is Nelson Mandela, the imprisoned leader of the African National Congress. In their heart of hearts, the white politicians who have locked him up for 21 years know it must be Mr. Mandela. That is why they offered him a conditional release last February. That is why they let two foreigners visit him recently, after decades of complete isolation. But it can only be a Nelson Mandela free without conditions, negotiating as an equal. And that is hard for Mr. Botha to do, knowing its necessity though he may. For he worries about his white constituents, and to an amazing degree they live in their suburbs and think life can go on unchanged. There the outside world can help. It can focus attention on the need to free Nelson Mandela, as the conservative British Government did last week, calling for his ''unconditional release.'' It can try to make South African whites feel in their pockets the revulsion of others, as France did in stopping new investment and moving for a U.N. Security Council resolution. And the Reagan Administration? It took six days to condemn the declaration of emergency. It insisted that it must not break with Pretoria; a White House official explained, ''They listen to us. We have influence.'' Influence for what? Bishop Desmond Tutu was surely right to ask what President Reagan's reaction would have been if the 500 people killed in South Africa had been white. ''We will not forget,'' he said, ''where the American Administration stood at a time when we needed them desperately.'' Desmond Tutu and many others in South Africa want to end their country's chaos. They want order: the order of hope, not the order of the grave."
