"Torture cases in the Philippines have increased as the Government has stepped up its fight against Communist insurgents, Amnesty International said in a report this week. ''Military intelligence agents are reported to have subjected detainees to severe beatings, electric shocks, stabbings, near suffocation with plastic bags or water, and sexual abuse,'' the report by the London-based group said. ''Similar abuses in police stations have been reported,'' it said. ''Soldiers on patrol have been accused of rape and other abuses in villages suspected of sympathizing with rebel forces.'' This ''pattern of torture'' has re-emerged even though President Corazon C. Aquino's Government enacted constitutional and legal measures to outlaw brutality, the report said. ''Amnesty International believes that immediate action is still needed to enforce legal safeguards against incommunicado detention, to investigate fully all allegations of torture, and to bring those responsible to justice.'' In Manila, Mrs. Aquino responded to the report, which was issued on Thursday. ''I am in touch with the progress of these cases,'' she said. ''The final reports are not yet in as not all witnesses have been heard.'' She urged human rights organizations to submit reports of violations to a new committee she created this week to investigate reported abuses. Last Saturday, Mrs. Aquino acknowledged that violations were continuing, but blamed the Communist insurgency led by the New People's Army for most of them. She said that the abuse of human rights was not a policy of her administration and that it was unfair to blame the problem exclusively on the military. ''They have to give us a chance,'' said Mary Concepcion Bautista, chairwoman of the Commission on Human Rights in Manila. ''We have to investigate. We cannot be Amnesty International, which just publishes reports. They are being unfair.'' Amnesty International said it knew of no instance of a military or police officer being convicted of a serious human rights offense since Mrs. Aquino came to power in February 1986 in the military-civilian uprising that ousted President Ferdinand E. Marcos. Rebels Report Being Tortured Alleged members of the banned Communist Party of the Philippines and its military wing, the New People's Army, are among those who have said they were tortured, the report said. Amnesty International said it is aware the rebel army has killed captives. It said it ''condemns such abuses by opposition groups, but stresses they can never justify human rights violations by government forces.'' The organization said it had received no official response from the Philippines to its March report detailing allegations of murder by military and paramilitary forces and instances of ''disappearances.'' The organization did note that Mrs. Aquino has dissolved the National Intelligence and Security Agency, which was accused of torture under President Marcos. The Philippines' Commission on Human Rights issued guidelines on the rights of prisoners in May, the report said, and those guidelines were affirmed by leaders of the military and the national police force."
