"The file has been on the desk for weeks - the clippings about arrests, beatings and killings and a copy of the historic speech to which the world paid almost no attention at all. The file is marked ''Tibet'' and it keeps being put aside. And you suspect that most readers are probably not wildly interested in Tibet, so why inflict your own fascination and sorrow for that country on them, one more time? There is always something else to write about. Anyway, what's the point? The Chinese are not going to relax their grip on Tibet and not one other country wants to do anything. So push the file aside, maybe wait for some kind of news peg to come along and justify writing about Tibet again. Well, here's a possible news peg, will this do? Asia Watch, the human rights monitoring group, has just put out a report saying that there is severe abuse of every human right in Tibet and that torture is routine in political arrests. No country, including the United States, raises a cry, Asia Watch says. Is that because the Chinese lock the foreign press out of Tibet? Or is it really because the U.S. has important business afoot with China, or thinks it has, and does not want to risk it for a country with no significance except in culture, religion, history, freedom struggles, that kind of thing? Here's another possible angle - a statement by Qiao Shi, the head of the Chinese security apparatus, which is a major part of a Chinese occupation policy that has partitioned the country, moved millions of Chinese into Tibet and Tibetans out, imprisoned scores of thousands of others, burned down thousands of monasteries, driven the man who is Tibet's leader and God-figure into 30 years of exile and cost the lives of perhaps a million Tibetans. Now, says Qiao Shi, China has decided to alter its policy in Tibet and will no longer be ''lenient.'' From now on, he says, the policy will be ''severe.'' Yet, somehow, hope lives among Tibetans, for a taste of freedom and for the right to worship as they please. In their exile capital of Dharmsala on the Indian side of the Himalayas, they eagerly seize on the words of encouragement that come from Congress, led by a number of Republicans and Democrats moved by Tibetan bravery. Tibetans bless them and President Jimmy Carter, quietly a strong friend of Tibet. The man who is Tibet's leader and its incarnation of the spirit of God is the 14th Dalai Lama. He usually signs himself ''Tenzin Gyatso, Buddhist monk.'' He lives in Dharmsala, in exile since 1959, but occasionally goes abroad in his nation's cause. Most governments are polite to him but ask that he not say much in their countries - the Chinese, you know. In June, in Strasbourg, before the European Parliament, he spoke his heart once more. This time he said Tibet would accept China's right to handle Tibetan foreign affairs and keep troops in Tibet, if China would agree to live in association with Tibet and allow it a democratically chosen government where Tibetans manage Tibetan affairs and man and nature lives in harmony. He did not give away Tibetan sovereignty, which he said Tibetans had never conceded to foreign powers in almost two millennia of existence. But he said he knew that this important, painful step toward acknowledgment of Chinese power would disappoint many Tibetans. Most newspapers of the world gave the speech zero space. Some printed a few paragraphs. But the Tibetans heard. Many were sorrowful, and some were angry, but all still follow Tenzin Gyatso. The Chinese responded with a brief, harsh dismissal - and more repression in Tibet. China is a great nation and Tibet is small and imprisoned. Is there really any point, beyond sentiment, in keeping the Tibetan file on the desk instead of putting it away in a cabinet of the mind? Yes, the Tibetans say, perhaps one day the Chinese will change. The Chinese react with anger when any nation raises the Tibetan question. Yet, Tibetans and their supporters say, that very anger covers a sensitivity to what the world thinks of China, and the new China may not always want to be seen as cruel and oppressive. But if the world forgets, the Chinese will pay no price of loss of respect. That will be the end of us, the Tibetans say, and they know the Chinese quite well. So if Tenzin Gyatso still hopes, all who wish him and his people well at least can do what Tibetans ask: Remember them and speak of them."
