"A typical killing begins when a group of armed men, unknown in the neighborhood or village, appear at a doorway in the middle of the night. A man, later identified by the authorities as a criminal, is taken away by force. In a day or so his bullet-riddled body is found nearby, where it has been deposited after the killing in some more distant place. Sometimes the killers leave 10,000 rupiahs, about $10, on the body to cover the cost of burial. In the case of Idrus Mohamed Soleh, a 28-year-old school watchman in Jakarta, two men, one wearing a ski mask, threw open the door to the bedroom where Mr. Soleh and his wife, Lisdawati, 23, were asleep one night in November. The masked man pulled out a pistol and fired two shots into Mr. Soleh's head. The intruders then strode out, ignoring the horrified wife. An account of the incident in the Hong Kong news magazine Asiaweek was obliterated with black ink by Government censors before the publication was allowed to reach readers in Indonesia. Mr. Soleh had no criminal record but he was a member of a Jakarta gang. Unlike ''death squad'' operations reported in such countries as El Salvador and the Philippines, the killings in Indonesia are believed to be free of political motivation, at least so far. A human rights lawyer, who asked to be anonymous, estimated recently that there had been 3,000 to 4,000 such clandestine ''executions'' since President Suharto's Government began a vigorous anticrime campaign about a year and a half ago. Though the role of Government agencies in the slayings is unclear, the victims are always identified by the authorities as known malefactors, usually with police records linking them to crimes of violence. Many bodies bear tattoos, the traditional badge of the Indonesian gangster. Some Indonesians have expressed concern, however, that people are being killed for reasons other than criminality or that some have been killed in error. The uniform methodology of the killings indicates a centrally directed campaign to exterminate criminalism, and bullets recovered from bodies have shown that the weapons used were the same as the standard army and police handguns. A recent United States State Department report said there was no verifiable estimate of the number of such killings. It added: ''In published statements, Government officials have indicated that 'hundreds' were killed. Human rights groups claimed that there were up to 4,000 victims during 1983.'' Reports in Press Curbed Since those responsible for the deaths were unknown, Indonesian newspapers referred to such incidents as ''penembak misterius,'' or ''mysterious killings,'' until the Government ordered the strictly controlled press to stop reporting such cases last year. The term, though not seen in local publications now, caught on and is widely used. Although human rights organizations here have been disturbed by the killings, Indonesians generally are unconcerned ''unless the victim is a relative,'' said a writer on public affairs, who also asked not to be identified. ''People are glad that it has become safer to walk the streets,'' a Jakarta editor said, alluding to a significant drop in the rate of reported crime since the ''mysterious killings'' in many parts of the country reached their height last year. Although the incidents are continuing, according to the human rights lawyer, the number of cases is believed to have tapered off since the beginning of this year. The Suharto Government, as sensitive to the country's reputation abroad as it is to its own image at home, has changed its explanations more than once in denying official involvement in the killings. First it said the victims were shot while trying to escape from custody or resisting arrest, then that they were killed by angry neighbors. The latest explanation is that the deaths are a result of gang warfare. Role of Security Forces Seen ''While a number of Indonesian officials denied any Government involvement, others acknowledged that security forces were responsible,'' the State Department declared in February in its report to the Senate and House Committees on Foreign Relations. Under the law, such reports on human rights are required periodically on all countries receiving American aid. The human rights lawyer said a policeman arrested for shooting a rival for a woman's affections had told interrogators he had participated in more than 40 of the killings. He was released without charge, the lawyer said, possibly to keep his story from coming out in a public trial. The State Department report said there had been reports of instances in which mistaken identity had resulted in the wrong person's being shot. It also noted ''increasing expressions of concern'' that the killing of alleged miscreants ''might get out of control.'' Mulya Lubis, chairman of the Indonesian Legal Aid Foundation in Jakarta, told an interviewer recently that if the killing of criminals could be condoned, the practice ''could then extend to people like oppositionists, politicians and lawyers.'' Justice System Called Ineffective Many Indonesians defend the killings on the ground that the country's justice system is ineffective, with judges tending to be too lenient in sentencing. ''The judicial process is slow,'' Suryono Sukanto, a University of Indonesia sociologist, wrote in the popular newspaper Kompas. ''It takes criminal cases an average of 14 months to come to court. The time spent is too long.'' But Adam Malik, the former Vice President of Indonesia, who now writes and lectures on Indonesian political and social questions, maintains that neither the ''mysterious killings'' nor judicial reforms will eliminate the rampant crime in the country. ''The root cause is economic,'' he said recently. Relatives of victims in the killings are reluctant to comment, but Indonesian journalists say that they, like Dr. Malik, tend to blame flaws in the social system for the criminal tendencies that caused relatives to fall afoul of the killer squads. The street vendors and others who have been targets of extortionists who were later killed tend to be on the side of the killers. ''The mysterious killings have made my life a lot easier,'' the owner of a food stall on a Jakarta side street said."
