"United States officials have for the first time expressed alarm about what they say is the violation of human rights in refugee camps run by the Khmer Rouge near the Thai-Cambodian border. The State Department had previously criticized the Khmer Rouge, saying it must never be allowed to return to power in Cambodia, where it was responsible for a bloody reign of terror from 1975 through 1978. Now American officials are joining those from other countries and the United Nations in explicitly criticizing conditions in camps run by the Khmer Rouge. A new investigation by United Nations officials concludes that there has been an ''outrageous violation of human rights'' at some of the camps. S. A. M. S. Kibria, the United Nations coordinator for humanitarian assistance to Cambodia, said that more than 7,000 Cambodians had disappeared from one of the camps controlled by the Khmer Rouge. Only 2,000 people, many of them elderly or disabled, remain in the camp, at Ta Luan in southeastern Thailand, he said. Mitchell L. Carlson, field coordinator for the United Nations Border Relief Operation, said the Cambodians had been moved from that camp into war zones where they were exposed to artillery shelling, mines and malaria. American officials said this week that they believed that many of the missing Cambodians, though civilians, had been required to carry weapons and supplies to Khmer Rouge forces in Cambodia. Tony Jackson, the Cambodia policy adviser for Oxfam, an international relief agency based in Britain, said: ''Those 7,000 people are lost; they are prisoner-slaves of the Khmer Rouge. It would be appalling if refugees in other camps are now pressed into the service of the Khmer Rouge war machine.'' In its effort to regain power, the Khmer Rouge has been fighting forces of the Cambodian Government, which are backed by Vietnamese troops. American officials said they suspected that Khmer Rouge soldiers had stolen rice, fish and other food donated to refugees through the United Nations. Patricia M. Byrne, a member of the American delegation to the United Nations, said the State Department was concerned about reports that ''human rights abuses are still occurring in these camps.'' The United Nations and other outside groups have been denied access to the Khmer Rouge camps, so they cannot monitor conditions, Mr. Carlson said. Khmer Rouge officials contend that the areas are not safe for people to visit. Fred Isler of the International Committee of the Red Cross said Friday that residents of the camps often had ''no access to medical treatment.'' Employees of international relief agencies cannot enter the camps to deliver care, and ''the Khmer Rouge refuse to permit people to leave the camps to go to hospitals,'' he said. #75,000 in Khmer Rouge Camps Mr. Kibria said he had suspended deliveries of supplies and services to one of the camps because of a ''total lack of cooperation'' by the Khmer Rouge. About 75,000 Cambodians live in camps run by the Khmer Rouge, and more than 225,000 live in camps run by the two non-Communist factions opposed to the Government in Phnom Penh. A Thai official said that Cambodians continue arriving in the border camps at a rate of about 700 a month. The Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, ruled Cambodia from 1975 through 1978 and presided over a brutal restructuring of society in which more than a million Cambodians died. Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978, ousted the Khmer Rouge and installed a Government in Phnom Penh. Since then, hundreds of thousands of Cambodians have fled to the Thai border, and many are still trapped in camps near the border. Officials in the United States and other countries fear that the Khmer Rouge has established a bridgehead in northwestern Cambodia and is preparing to take power as Vietnamese forces leave Cambodia. Vietnam has said that it would withdraw its troops, thought to number 110,000 to 120,000, by early 1990."
