"AS Sri Lanka and India edge toward an agreement that will send 40,000 Indian peacekeeping troops home, people on both sides of the straits that separate the two countries are counting the political costs of New Delhi's ill-fated foray into a foreign war. The conflict the Indians came to end is not over. On the contrary, the seeds of even more bitter battles have been sown. At first glance, the two years that have passed since Indian forces arrived to disarm Tamil rebels seem to have brought worse disaster to Sri Lanka. The presence of Indian troops, the historical enemy of Sri Lanka's Sinhalese majority, rekindled a revolt by a Sinhalese nationalist group, the leftist People's Liberation Front. By conservative estimates, 5,000 people have died since July 1987, when the guerrilla terror that had once been confined to the island's Tamil north erupted with even greater ferocity in the Sinhala south. An anti-Indian tirade soon became a full-fledged anti-Government campaign, first against President J. R. Jayewardene, who signed the agreement with India allowing the troops in, and then against his successor, Ranasinghe Premadasa, despite the current leader's consistent opposition to the Indian Army presence. The violence led to more violence. The Sinhalese-dominated military trained its guns on other Sinhalese. Mysterious death squads formed. Thousands of people in Buddhist towns have been massacred, victims of the People's Liberation Front, the police and armed forces and, increasingly, the death squads, some of which are believed to be linked to politicians in the ruling United National Party. The Sri Lankan north and east, now merged in a single Tamil-dominated province, is also not at peace. The province is likely to disintegrate if a promised referendum is held there because areas dominated by Sinhalese or Muslims, who consider themselves an ethnic group, will probably opt out. The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the toughest guerrilla group, still roam in areas that have become virtual zones of Indian Army occupation. Other Tamil groups armed by the Indian peacekeeping forces to counter the Tigers' influence are certain to be the targets of Tiger vengeance when the Indians leave. Many Indians and Sri Lankans expect bitter fighting among rival Tamil armies, which have long tried to annihilate one another. India's costs have been high. India has lost at least 1,000 soldiers in Sri Lanka, where troops say they do not understand the purpose of the war, or why they are so despised by the Tamil population they thought they had come to save. The reputation of India's army, one of the world's largest and most disciplined fighting forces, has been tarnished by a well-documented human rights reports accusing Indian troops of torture and the killings of dozens of civilian Tamils, particularly in the Jaffna Peninsula, the center of Sri Lankan Tamil culture. Broken Consensus As the Indian venture in Sri Lanka ''blew up in our faces,'' in the words of a former Indian diplomat, a debate began in India on the country's regional policy. Rajni Kothari, a political scientist and leader of the Indian human rights lobby, said last week in New Delhi that the treatment of smaller nations in South Asia - not only Sri Lanka but also Nepal, with which India has a trade dispute, and Bangladesh, where joint discussions on ways to prevent floods have largely stalled - by the Government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi has broken a remarkable four decades of Indian consensus on foreign affairs. India's determination to withdraw from Sri Lanka on its own terms and not in July of this year as President Premadasa had demanded also attracted international criticism, even from Moscow, New Delhi's traditional friend in world forums. Soviet officials told Indian reporters accompanying Prime Minister Gandhi to Moscow in July that India could not count on Soviet backing if Sri Lanka decided to take its case to the United Nations. Sumit Chakravartty, a journalist writing in the left-of-center Indian journal Mainstream, said that one Soviet official told him that Moscow was ''opposed to the Balkanization of Sri Lanka,'' a response to suggestions in pro-Government Indian newspapers that Sri Lanka be partitioned into Tamil and Sinhalese areas as Cyprus was between Greek and Turkish zones. There had been speculation in South Asia since Mikhail S. Gorbachev's last visit to New Delhi a year ago that India had been relegated to a lesser category as the Soviet Union paid more attention to its own economy and to improving relations with the West. Few would have predicted that India's Sri Lankan imbroglio, and not some larger international issue, would make that shift public."
