"Prosecutors today announced the end of their investigations into Government corruption and human-rights abuses of the last eight years. The chief prosecutor, Park Chong Chol, said his office had arrested 47 people on charges of corruption or abuse of power, including 7 of former President Chun Doo Hwan's relatives, the former Mayor of Seoul, the former construction and transportation ministers and the former head of South Korea's intelligence agency. But opposition leaders immediately criticized the prosecutors' report as a whitewash, saying they had failed to question and arrest some of the highest-level officials involved. For almost a year now, South Korea has been consumed with its past - a wrenching and exhilarating process that more than anything else has convinced many Koreans that the days of torture and terror will not return. How to assuage public outrage over past wrongs and how to treat former President Chun remain the most pressing political issues confronting President Roh Tae Woo. Chun's Exposed Abuses ''For the first time, Korean people assessed the past,'' said a Korean journalist who has covered the three months of legislative hearings that prompted the prosecutors' investigation. ''Who could imagine these men being brought to court and crying? With the hearings, Korean democracy crossed the bridge of no return.'' Almost as soon as Mr. Chun left office last February, journalists and politicians began exposing the abuses of his rule - widespread corruption, systematic torture of political opponents, draconian controls on the press, the 1980 killings of hundreds of protesters in the southwestern city of Kwangju, the detention of thousands of people in ''purification'' camps and the dismissal of thousands of civil servants. The governing Democratic Justice Party praised the prosecutors' work and called on politicians to stop raking up the past and start building a future. But opposition parties, which dominate the legislature, said the prosecutors should have arrested several of Mr. Chun's most senior aides. Nationally televised legislative hearings and the subsequent inquiries forced a humbled Mr. Chun to apologize to the nation and make a well-publicized retreat to a Buddhist monastery and sent Mr. Roh's popularity plummeting. 'We Are Still on the Past' The hearings set off Mr. Roh's most serious, and still unresolved, political crisis - how to spare his old friend and ally as much as possible while convincing the public that his Government, which includes many of those responsible for past repression, is different. Some South Koreans assert that the emphasis on the past is becoming destructive, fanning old hatreds and preventing the nation from building a real democracy by revising repressive laws still on the books. ''Unfortunately, we are still on the past,'' said Hong Sa Duk, a former legislator who criticizes Mr. Roh for failing to quickly remedy past wrongs and opposition leaders for dwelling on the past. ''We will pay the cost because we cannot prepare for the future.'' But Kim Dae Jung, president of the largest opposition party, asserts along with many other Koreans that only a thorough accounting will prevent future dictatorships and that when wrongdoers see they will be punished, they will be less tempted to seize power. ''Without solving the past,'' Mr. Kim said. ''the Korean people cannot go forward to the future.'' Crawling on Broken Glass In their investigations, the prosecutors examined dozens of cases of suspected corruption. They concluded that the Los Angeles-based Northrop Corporation paid at least $6.25 million to a businessman thought to be close to Mr. Chun in an effort to promote the sale of its F-20 fighters. And they arrested scores of officials for crimes like accepting bribes to grant lucrative golf-course licenses or embezzlement of public funds. But they said they had found no evidence to support several other charges, including accusations that Chun aides extorted $86 million from corporate executives to build a research institute to serve as a power base for Mr. Chun after his retirement and that officials from a state-run nuclear power plant accepted bribes from an American engineering company to win a contract. The televised legislative hearings that began in November unearthed dozens of charges of corruption and human-rights abuses, drawing higher ratings than even the Olympic Games in Seoul last fall. A stunned nation heard confirmation of stories before only whispered, and watched men cower who once made them tremble. They heard such things as how the new Chun Government sent thousands of ''vagrants'' and political opponents to ''purification'' camps, where they were forced to crawl over broken glass and work into the night constructing roads and buildings. At least 50 people died. 'We Have Done Enough' Now, with the prosecutors' report out, President Roh and his party are hoping to stop the excavations of the past. ''All the past 40 years have come out into the open, and it's been a kind of national hurricane,'' said Park Jyun Kyu, chairman of the Democratic Justice Party. ''But we have done enough. If we go further, it will mean a kind of revolution. Over the past 40 years, there have been many wrongs - I admit that. But in retrospect, we have been a shining example of all the newly independent countries after World War II.'' Mr. Park said the ruling party wants to begin revising dozens of repressive laws. But opposition leaders are demanding first that Mr. Chun and former President Choi Kyu Hah testify before the legislature and that an independent special prosecutor be appointed."
