"When Nguyen Thuong of Vietnam took the floor in Geneva a few days ago to complain about human rights violations around the world, he seemed to embody one of the most difficult quandaries of the United Nations. Mr. Thuong was speaking at the annual six-week session of the Human Rights Commission, which finished its work last week. He praised Argentina for saying it would respect human rights, he denounced Guatemala and El Salvador for ''crimes against humanity'' and he contended that the United States was trying to impose ''imperialist domination'' in Central America. The quandary for diplomats concerned about human rights is that Mr. Truong comes from a country that has itself been accused by private human rights organizations such as Amnesty International of gross abuses, including the long-term imprisonment of thousands of people for political reasons and the forcible expulsion of much of its ethnic Chinese population. Yet Vietnam has never been mentioned in any resolution of the commission for human rights violations within its own borders. Criticism From the West The commission, which is a special committee of the United Nations General Assembly, has long been criticized in the West for what is considered a biased and inconsistent examination of human rights problems. Diplomats, particularly those of the United States, have contended that the 43-nation commission often serves as a platform for self-righteous condemnations of such countries as Israel and right-wing Latin American nations but that it rarely looks at what are widely perceived to be serious abuses in Communist or third-world countries. In many respects, the session that ended last week illustrated the problem. The commission, for example, dealt a serious blow to a Western proposal to focus attention on Poland's suppression of the Solidarity union. For two years, in what was seen as a move toward impartiality, the commission authorized studies of rights violations in Poland, the only time in its 39-year history that it had done so in regard to a Communist country. But last week the body accepted by a vote of 16 to 15, with 12 abstentions, a Cuban motion to discontinue the Polish investigation. Still, judging the overall performance of the commission is complicated. While losing the vote on Poland Wednesday, the West won a victory Thursday when the commission voted to press a formal investigation of human rights abuses in Soviet-occupied Afghanistan. The decision was protested by the Soviet delegation as an ''interference in the internal affairs of Afghanistan.'' Resolution on Cambodia Adopted Other third-world countries, such as Iran, have also come up on the official commission agenda. The commission also approved a resolution calling for the withdrawal of all foreign forces from Cambodia, an allusion to the Vietnamese occupation of that country. Still, the record of the latest session indicated that efforts to broaden the commission's work to include rights violations wherever they took place ran into difficulties. Diplomats said a major element in this was the tendency for the commission to become an arena for political conflict. Despite these difficulties, some Western delegates contend that their participation is worthwhile, in part because focusing attention on human rights in at least some countries can lead to improvements. Others argue that by focusing most intensively on such habitual targets as Israel, South Africa and El Salvador, the commission's majority deflects attention from abuses elsewhere."
