"To the Editor: In the Indian Ocean island of Sri Lanka, genocide of the ethnic Tamil minority goes on unabated, unimpeded and for the most part unnoticed. Tamil kingdoms flourished in the northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka for more than 1,000 years before European conquest. At independence in 1972, Tamils inhabited the northern and eastern provinces; Sinhalese, the western and southern areas. The central highlands were home to the descendants of Tamils brought as indentured laborers from India more than a century earlier. Instead of building a united Sri Lanka, successive governments embarked on building a Sinhalese-only state. Indian-origin Tamils were disenfranchised; parity of languages was abolished; large numbers of Sinhalese were settled in Tamil areas; discrimination against entry of Tamils into universities and the civil service was institutionalized, and peaceful protests were met by Government-sponsored pogroms. Tamil provinces were turned over to the Sinhalese-only army, once described in your pages as ''the most undisciplined and trigger-happy outside of Africa.'' Driven to the wall, the worm turned. Tamil youth took to armed struggle. When some army members were ambushed in 1982, the army retaliated by killing civilian hostages. The army and the police joined rioters in Sinhalese areas, thousands of Tamils were killed, and Tamil property was destroyed. Political prisoners were killed and their bodies mutilated inside the locked doors of the prisons. President J. R. Jayawardene did not condemn the violence. Instead he warned that if India intervened, all Tamils in Sinhalese areas will be ''finished.'' India did intervene diplomatically. It offered refugees asylum and played honest broker between the Tamil leadership and the Sri Lankan Government, to arrive at a solution to preserve the island's unity and secure autonomy and human rights for the Tamil minority. But the Sinhalese establishment refuses to concede even a Federal setup on the Indian, American or Canadian pattern. The Sri Lankan Army systematically rounds up all Tamil youth between 14 and 40 years, and executes them. Farm workers are massacred in the rice fields. Roman Catholic priests are gunned down along with their parishioners. Any resistance is answered by aerial bombing and execution of hostages. Amnesty International, international jurists and foreign journalists who documented the atrocities are expelled from the Tamil areas. President Jayawardene claims that he has reduced the Tamils to a minority in the eastern province and promises to do the same in the northern province. Sri Lanka's economy is a shambles, and the annual budget is made up substantially by foreign aid. The U.S. is a major donor. The Tamils plead that an independent human-rights group be sent to the northern and eastern provinces, and if the charges are confirmed, to stop all aid till the genocide is stopped and a political settlement is reached. T. RAMAKRISHNAN Lafayette, La., April 1, 1986"
