"In the hot, bright summer of his first few weeks of freedom, Kim Keun Tae is blinking at the changes in his life and his country. He sits cross-legged on the wooden floor of his home in the outskirts of Seoul, next to pictures of his two young children and a bottle of the pain-killer Tylenol. He moves stiffly and speaks slowly, pausing occasionally to press his fingers to his forehead when the memories come too fast. Nearly three years ago, just after dawn, security agents broke into Mr. Kim's home and took him to the anti-Communist bureau of the National Police Headquarters. There, for 20 days, they stripped him naked, beat him, tied him up, applied electric shocks all over his body, and poured red pepper water into his nostrils and down his throat. A prominent opposition leader and labor movement worker, Mr. Kim was branded a Communist by the Government and convicted of violating South Korea's strict National Security Law. He was sentenced to seven years in prison, despite a court battle to prove that his confession was extracted under torture. He carefully saved the scabs that formed over his wounds as evidence; guards confiscated them and a prison doctor testified that he found no signs that Mr. Kim had been tortured. Appeals by Rights Groups Mr. Kim stayed in jail - isolated from other prisoners and allowed family visits once a month - despite appeals from international human rights groups, designation by Amnesty International as a Prisoner of Conscience, and a Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Award for Human Rights given to him and his wife, In Jae Keun. Explaining why the nation's most famous political prisoner was not released even after the Government bowed to widespread demonstrations and pledged democratic changes June 29, 1987, officials said Mr. Kim must first renounce what they called his pro-Communist beliefs. He refused. A year and a day later, on June 30, the Government let him go anyway to mark the first anniversary of the democratic reforms. Now, the man who is perhaps South Korea's most eloquent witness to the cruelties of its past is preparing to help shape its future. Mr. Kim emerged into a Korea that has held the first free presidential elections in 16 years, elected its first opposition majority to the legislature, and eased restrictions on its press and its laborers' right to organize. For the first time in years, no intelligence agents lurk outside Mr. Kim's door. ''Definitely, there are changes,'' said Mr. Kim, who looks younger than his 41 years, but still walks like a much older man. ''There is less fear of the Government, less fear of surveillance. For most people, now is better than before, when people would feel they lived in fear or could face arrest.'' An End to Torture Another fear has abated, too - the fear of torture. As word of his torture spread, Mr. Kim became a symbol of the Government's torture of political prisoners. Public concern about torture turned to outrage in January 1987, when the Government was forced to admit that a young student, Park Jong Chul, was killed when his interrogators pushed his head under water over the side of a metal tub. Mr. Kim said he has not heard of any political prisoners now being tortured. Yet the Korea of his past continues to haunt him. Mr. Kim is fairly confident that his telephone is still tapped, and says that if he were to leave Seoul, security agents would know about it and track him. He says he believes he was set free as a publicity ploy, and says several hundred other political prisoners remain in jail. The Government disputes this assertion, saying that the only people left in jail are those who committed violence or those who are Communists. Nor can he yet shake free from the shadows of his torture and imprisonment. ''During my torture, I reached a point where it occurred to me that I am dying, and I thought, this was a wasted life,'' he said. ''My human dignity was disintegrating. I was no better than an animal. I was naked, on my knees, crawling. I begged them to kill me, I would talk, to let me die in comfort. I found the will to stand up again. But I still haven't gotten over how it felt to be living like an animal.'' He added, ''I feel it is my responsibility to overcome this, not only for my own salvation but for the sake of the Korean people.'' A Mantle of Morality Such messianic language is common here, where many share the Korean belief, born of centuries of Confucianism, that personal morality is the most important qualification for public life. His personal sufferings, and his refusal so far to run for office, thus avoiding the compromises professional politicians have to make, have bestowed on him the mantle of morality. He wears it consciously. ''Kim Keun Tae is one of the most influential political activists in the opposition movement,'' said Choi Jang Jip, an associate professor of political science at Korea University. ''He is entirely different from the older generation of institutionalized politicians such as Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam - he is more progressive, on the left, although not as revolutionary as the students.'' Despite his lingering physical weakness, Mr. Kim remains a powerful man, with a message that is unlikely to please his Government - or the United States, for that matter. ''I would like to see myself as one of the leaders of the people's democratic movement,'' he said. ''That means anti-imperialism, opposing the military fascists, and overcoming foreign intervention in Korean politics. It seems to me that foreign influence is one of the things hindering development of our democracy.'' On Foreign Intervention Mr. Kim is one of several opposition leaders who believes that the United States Government values stability over democracy because of its support of past authoritarian rulers and its role in the division of the Korean peninsula after World War II. His role in Korean politics, he said, will be not to supplant opposition politicians such as Kim Dae Jung or Kim Young Sam, but to goad them. ''It is clear that the two Kims are against military dictatorship, and for that reason they have a broad base of mass support,'' he said. ''But they don't seem to take the issue of foreign intervention as seriously. I see my role not as a substitute, but to exert pressure on them to take the right direction.'' Mr. Kim says he has had to turn down several requests to speak at rallies. He made one exception, a rally calling for the release of remaining political prisoners. But for now, he is still new to freedom, still trying to reconcile himself to his past. He said he remembered reading an autobiography of a concentration camp prisoner who at first viewed his guards with fear and contempt, then found himself caught up in a ''pathological love'' as he realized they could decide whether he would live or die. ''I saw a man trying to transform himself and recover his dignity,'' Mr. Kim said. ''I can say I have gone through a similar experience.''"
