"The Reagan Administration asked Congress to delay publication of an annual worldwide report on human rights violations to avoid embarrassing the visiting president of South Korea, Chun Doo Hwan, Congressional aides said today. This was confirmed by the acting State Department spokesman, William J. Dyess, who said that ''we did suggest to them that they take into consideration the fact that we have a visiting dignitary in town.'' The report for the calendar year 1980 on some 160 countries is said to include a section highly critical of South Korean human rights practices. The report was prepared by the Carter Administration's State Department and would normally have been made public yesterday. Statement Delayed a Week But a staff aide from the Senate Foreign Relations Committee said that the State Department asked last week that the report not be issued until after Mr. Chun left Washington. As a result, the aide said, the report is now due for release next Monday. The request was consistent with the Reagan Administration's approach to human rights questions, in contrast with the policy followed by the Carter Administration. President Reagan and Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. have both criticized the Carter Administration for its willingness to reprove friendly governments in public for human rights practices. Mr. Haig was reported by a senior aide to have told his staff that while he intends to give high priority to protecting ''individual rights,'' he disapproves of publicly criticizing nations that are allied or are not hostile to the United States. No More 'Report Cards' The aide said Mr. Haig was opposed to issuing ''report cards'' on how sovereign governments carry out human rights practices. If problems arise, the aide said, this adminsitration ''will speak to governments through diplomatic channels.'' Mr. Dyess said the human rights report ''has in the past often proved controversial.'' ''It is our belief,'' he said, ''that it simply would not be good diplomatic practice to have such a controversial report come to light when we have a visiting dignitary in town. It is as simple as that.  We did not press the Congress. We simply pointed out this consideration. A decision on it was left up to the desires on the Hill.'' Under law, the human rights reports have been supplied by the State Department to Congress annually since 1977. They were originally demanded by Congress to acquire an objective yardstick to measure human rights in countries that received foreign aid. The legislation in 1976 that authorized those reports was resisted by Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, but the measure was approved by Congress over his objections. The first set of country reports was filed by the outgoing Ford Administration in January 1977."
