"Under the name of ''anti-Communism,'' the President of the United States has just had a friendly meeting with a tyrant who makes a policy of mass murder. That is what has happened, in Ronald Reagan's Administration, to Americans' belief that their country stands for basic human decency in the world. Gen. Efrain Rios Montt made himself President of Guatemala in a coup last March. He seemed at first to be easing up on the official kidnapping and murder that have marked Guatemala City, the capital, under recent right-wing regimes. But it soon became clear that in the countryside the army was carrying out gruesome massacres. The victims are the indigenous Indians of Guatemala, living in remote and primitive villages. The army's policy under General Rios Montt is to decimate whole villages when people there are suspected of helping anti-government guerrillas - or even without suspicion, as a warning to others. Firsthand accounts of the horrors appear in a report by the Americas Watch Committee, a nonpartisan U.S. group headed by an eminent New York lawyer, Orville H. Schell. A refugee told of soldiers surrounding his village, killing women with machetes, setting fire to the huts. The young man said helicopters had descended on his village; soldiers seized villagers, and gouged out one man's eyes. Those Indian villagers were not armed. They were not charged with any crime. They were killed simply as part of a campaign to deny the Indian countryside to the guerrillas. The campaign, as The Boston Globe aptly put it, ''falls somewhere between a pogrom and genocide.'' After he met General Rios Montt, President Reagan was asked by reporters about human rights violations in Guatemala. ''Frankly,'' he replied, ''I am inclined to believe they've been getting a bum rap.'' He indicated that he would soon move to restore military aid, which has been denied to Guatemala for years because of its bloody human rights record. The decision to embrace General Rios Montt is characteristic of the Reagan Administration's approach on human rights. The Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, Elliott Abrams, and his people try to do some good. But concern for minimum decencies is regularly overridden by the argument that we have to support and even praise brutal dictators because they are against Communism. Thus President Reagan this week welcomes to Washington the military ruler of Pakistan, Mohammed Zia ul-Haq, who since he took over in 1977 has eliminated the political opposition and resorted regularly to torture. A year ago, I heard about a university scientist who was arrested, hung upside down for several days, had red hot peppers forced into him. He and other academics remain in prison, held without trial or charges. Other distinguished visitors to the United States in the Reagan years have included the dictators of South Korea and the Philippines. Vice President Bush, on a visit to the Philippines, praised President Marcos for his ''adherence to democratic principles.'' Jeane Kirkpatrick, our United Nations delegate, visited the military tyrannies in Chile and Argentina. The theory of the Reagan policy on human rights, if there is one, is that we should be tough on Communist governments while speaking quietly to ''friends'' who err. Does this help the victims? Not in Guatemala. And not in the Soviet Union: Since Mr. Reagan took office, Soviet repression has increased and Jewish immigration virtually stopped. In terms of helping the victims, United States policy might well be more effective if it focused on countries that depend on our aid. So Alan Tonelson argues in the quarterly Foreign Policy, and he has a point. But we have our own souls to save in any case. As a matter of selfrespect, quite apart from what we can do to help, the United States should not be embracing torturers and murderers. President Belisario Betancur of Colombia appealed to President Reagan to care about human rights. ''Our responsibility as heads of state,'' he said, ''does not allow us to remain unmoved by the daily opening of gravesites in the ground of our common geography: 30,000 graves in El Salvador, to mention only one nation, shock the drowsy conscience of leaders.'' Was Mr. Reagan's conscience shocked? Not one government official in El Salvador has been brought to justice for those 30,000 killings, though everyone knows that official military policy is their main cause. Even the American Ambassador has lately been moved to public protest. But Ronald Reagan said El Salvador had been ''making great progress'' on human rights. The shame marks all of us. When the economic follies of the Reagan Administration have been forgotten, its insensitivity to human cruelty will still stain the name of the United States."
