"A modest offensive by troops of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a non-Communist Cambodian rebel faction, appears to have bogged down in northwestern Cambodia, diplomats say. Roughly two weeks ago, about 5,000 troops of the faction, which receives non-arms aid from the United States, moved across the border north of Sisophon from their sanctuaries in Thailand as two Vietnamese battalions in the area were withdrawn. The departure was part of Vietnam's pullout from Cambodia, which, the Vietnamese say, was completed on Sept. 26 after an occupation of nearly 11 years. The liberation front, which has long been marked by factionalism and smuggling, has tried to pull itself together to convince Washington that it deserves further aid. The Bush Administration says it is contemplating direct arms supplies to the liberation FRont and the forces of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, which Washington says it has never supplied. These non-Communist forces are the smaller partners in a rebel alliance with the Khmer Rouge, a Communist group opposed by the United States. Some Praise, Some Skepticism The liberation front's deputy commander, Dien Del, claims to have captured ''strategic towns,'' but diplomats say most of the populated settlements taken consist of crossroads with a few thatched houses and small military garrisons. Still, upbeat Western diplomats say the front has done ''surprisingly well'' given its fractured past and a nearly absolute break between Son Sann, a former Cambodian Prime Minister who is its titular head, and its military force led by Sak Sutsakhan. Diplomats of countries that do not aid the Cambodian guerrillas are more skeptical. ''There's fighting going on, but not much,'' an Asian diplomat said. He said he is worried that ''the information is largely coming from one source, the K.P.N.L.F. itself.'' Under pressure to show their viability after the Vietnamese withdrew, the liberation front's generals have disciplined their ranks and put about 16,000 fighters under arms, its highest figure in six years, the Western diplomats said. Strutting Around the Border The forces of Prince Sihanouk, the leader of the coalition opposed to Phnom Penh, ''still isn't doing much of anything,'' a senior diplomat said. ''They're good at walking around the border in their American uniforms and Singapore M-16's and attracting recruits, but they don't fight much.'' The Khmer Rouge, Asian diplomats suggest, is happy to allow the liberation front to get some attention, having understood that major Khmer Rouge offensives or victories so soon after the Vietnamese withdrawal would be bound to frighten the West and prove counterproductive. Aid officials say the Khmer Rouge has recently been improving the management of its refugee camps in Thailand and responding to aid agency complaints, long ignored, about human rights abuses and the intentional isolation of civilians from any contact with Western aid workers or doctors. Waiting for the Dry Season The Khmer Rouge is also likely to wait for any larger-scale offensive until the rainy season is over in November, an Asian diplomat said. ''Right now you can't get very far off the roads or you're waist-deep in water,'' he said. Despite charges by all factions of the resistance that Vietnamese soldiers remain fighting inside Cambodia, General Dien Del told The Associated Press on Friday, ''To be fair we have never seen Vietnamese in our area.'' But he said it was his opinion that 50,000 Vietnamese remained in Cambodia near the border with Vietnam. The liberation front has hit a dozen or so military garrisons along Route 69, which runs from the Thai border to Sisophon, the diplomats said, and took a village named Banteay Chmar, the headquarters of a Cambodian regiment, and a small town named Thmar Pouk. On Oct. 4, Phnom Penh has announced, the garrison at Kandol surrendered. From there, Cambodian Government soldiers could shell the outskirts of Site 2, the large Liberation Front refugee camp inside Thailand. The liberation front claims to have captured nearly 700 Government soldiers, hundreds of light weapons and a few tanks and artillery pieces. But it has made little progress in the last week, failing to take Svay Chek, an announced objective on Route 69 some 15 miles north of Sisophon."
