"The Cambodian Government of Pol Pot is due to sign the United Nations covenants on human rights tomorrow.  While Mr. Pol Pot ruled in Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 he was accused of genocide against his own people. His Government forced hundreds of thousands of people, including the sick and aged, to leave the cities and vast numbers died in the countryside. Educated people and others from the middle class were sometimes beaten to death rather than shot in order to save bullets. In all, according to one estimate, anywhere between 1.2 million and 1.8 million people were killed by the authorities. Ieng Sary, the deputy prime minister and foreign minister of the regime, which although it was ousted from power by the Vietnamese in 1979 still retains the Cambodian seat here, is scheduled to perform the signing at the world body. The Pol Pot forces are trying to maintain their status as Cambodia's legitimate government. This week they survived a challenge that would have cost them their United Nations seat. Next week they hope that the General Assembly will approve a resolution urging Vietnamese troops to withdraw from Cambodia and calling for an international conference to settle the nation's fate in a vote sponsored by the world body. Guerrilla Forces Fight On The covenants that Mr. Ieng Sary will sign declare, among other things, that ''no one shall be arbitrarily deprived of his life'' and that ''no one shall be subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.'' Although Mr. Pol Pot was driven from power his guerrilla forces, which are supported by China, are fighting on in northwest Cambodia.  Most of the countries here that backed the Pol Pot forces in their struggle to retain the world body seat, including the United States, did so on the ground that Vietnam's invasion must not be rewarded. In 1977 President Carter signed the two covenants on civil and political rights and economic, social and cultural rights. The Senate, however, has not yet ratified these agreements, which have the force of treaties. Mr. Ieng Sary intends to go a step further than Mr. Carter. The Cambodian will also sign a convention for the elimination of discrimination against women."
