"Former President Chun Doo Hwan retreated to a monastery today after an abject televised apology, but he faced renewed calls from South Koreans for an accounting for abuses during his eight-year rule. As radical students threw firebombs at the police and called for his execution, moderate opposition leaders, while accepting the sincerity of his repentence, called for an independent investigation of corruption and human rights abuses. They also said they would be closely watching the conduct of his successor, President Roh Tae Woo, who has struggled in his nine months in office to distance himself from the Chun administration, in which he served. Some South Koreans said the difficult moment appeared to have arrived for Mr. Roh to show that he had finally cut his ties of loyalty to Mr. Chun. Parties Are Divided The governing party, to which both Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh belong, issued a statement calling for acceptance of the apology and indicating a desire that the issue of past abuses be laid to rest. But the opposition parties that control Parliament demanded further investigations and warned that it was still too early for Mr. Roh to offer clemency, as his aides have hinted he might soon do. Mr. Roh's success in dealing with the Chun legacy was seen to depend ultimately on the public's readiness to accept the former President's apology, his departure from Seoul and the return of financial assets, which he promised in his address today. Mr. Chun's apology was forced in part by the participation of middle-class Koreans over the last three weeks in student demonstrations calling for his punishment. 'Distress Beyond Description' In the capital and across the country, normal business halted for 27 minutes this morning as people clustered around television sets to watch Mr. Chun, who described his feelings as ''extreme distress beyond description.'' There was a final moment of stillness after the former military strongman, tight-lipped as if in pain, concluded his address with a stiff bow and the words, ''I am truly sorry, my fellow citizens.'' Initial reactions appeared to be divided between renewed anger and sympathy for the humiliation of Mr. Chun and his wife, Lee Soon Ja, who was seen weeping as she and her husband left their residence. Five hours after their departure, Mr. Chun and his wife reportedly arrived in their chauffeur-driven car at Paekdam Temple, a Buddhist retreat in the mountains east of Seoul. It was not known how long they planned to stay. One woman, noting that the couple had abandoned their usual finery for shabby clothes, said their departure reminded her of the sad exiles of the kings of Korean history. Couple Dressed Shabbily ''It was enough to see the President in such shame,'' the woman, Li Chon Sin, said after watching Mr. Chun's apology with neighbors here. But Kim Do Yeon, a young dissident, called the entire presentation insincere and said, ''I want to see him arrested.'' Continuing public anger could spell political difficulties for Mr. Roh, who could become entangled in the charges against his former chief if investigations continue. ''I feel Roh is reluctant to investigate the real facts,'' Kim Dae Jung, the leader of the main opposition party, said in a statement. ''We will closely watch the steps he takes to settle the political situation in the country.'' There was also widespread cynicism about Mr. Chun's disclosures of his personal wealth, which he promised to donate to the state. Mr. Kim said he did not believe that the $3.3 million in personal wealth and $20 million in surplus political funds Mr. Chun said he would return were a full accounting, and he estimated his holdings in ''billions of dollars.'' Kim Young Sam, the leader of the second major opposition party, called for the naming of an independent special prosecutor to investigate corruption by Mr. Chun and his associates."
