"The American Embassy in Myanmar, formerly Burma, says it has ''credible, first-hand reports'' of routine and sometimes fatal mistreatment of pro-democracy figures in custody there. The abuses reportedly include beatings and torture. The report is included in an unclassified cablegram filed to Washington on Wednesday from the United States Embassy in the Burmese capital, Yangon, formerly Rangoon. The authenticity of the cablegram, obtained here today, has been confirmed by American officials. The embassy said thousands of Burmese had been arrested across the country since a political crackdown began on July 20, just before a series of commemorations of last year's pro-democracy demonstrations. The protests were suppressed by the military, leading to the deaths of about 3,000 unarmed Burmese. #2 Leaders Under House Arrest On July 20, the military Government put the country's two most prominent opposition politicians, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi and U Tin Oo of the National League for Democracy, under heavily guarded house arrest, cutting them off from contact with anyone except members of their immediate families. A wave of arrests of their colleagues followed. The arrests continue, the embassy said, with ''much of the leadership of the two most popular opposition parties,'' the National League for Democracy and the Democratic Party for a New Society, now in detention. An Aug. 11 report by Asia Watch, an independent organization that seeks to monitor human-rights abuses, said that as many as 1,500 Burmese were detained in recent weeks, although Asia Watch could not say how many were held for questioning and how many were imprisoned. Those detained include 7 members of the Executive Committee of the National League for Democracy and 43 students who were staying at the party headquarters, also the home of Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, Amnesty International said. On Aug. 11, according to the American Embassy cablegram, U Tin Myo Win of the National League for Democracy, who headed a committee supervising student activities in last year's uprising, was arrested. The entire leadership of the People's Progressive Party has also been arrested, along with the central executive committee of the League of Democratic Allies. Other parties suffering large numbers of arrests include the National Politics Front and the United Nationalities League for Democracy, the cablegram said. The embassy also reported that after weeks of widely circulated but unconfirmed accounts of the torture of political prisoners, ''we now have credible, first-hand reports that torture, beatings and mistreatment are commonplace and that in some instances death has resulted.'' Torture Is Described The reports described interrogations accompanied by tortures including cigarette burns, electric shocks to the genitals and beatings resulting in severe injuries to the eyes and ears. Sometimes, the cablegram said, prisoners were crowded into small cells in knee-deep water, while others were forced to stand in water for long periods during interrogations or undergo questioning for several days without sleep, sometimes blindfolded and forced to stand or to kneel with their hands cuffed behind their backs. Impressment of civilians by the army to carry munitions to the front lines of the war against ethnic insurgents also continues, the embassy said. It described an account of a recent event in the Shan State, in which about 500 men, some naked and some in their underwear, were tied together before being taken away for portering duty in Kachin State. The men were judged by witnesses to be educated, but older than students. They were taunted by soldiers who shouted: ''You were yelling for democracy last year. Why aren't you yelling now?'' When townspeople tried to give them food, the soldiers allowed them to provide only one packet of rice for every two or three porters. U.S. Statement Expected The cablegram, signed by the American Ambassador in Yangon, Burton Levin, was written in response to a State Department request ''to sanitize'' an account of arrests and torture of Burmese opposition figures. ''To sanitize'' generally means to eliminate all references to intelligence sources and methods so as to protect them, American officials said."
