"Amnesty International has charged that local provincial policemen were directly involved in the slaying or disappearance of dozens of unarmed Moslems during several days of Hindu-Moslem rioting in northern India last May. In a report issued Friday that is likely to create a political controversy, the London-based human rights agency asserted that witnesses had seen several hundred men taken away in trucks by the police, as well as several dozen driven to a canal and shot, with their bodies thrown in the water. It also said the police had ''gone on a rampage'' in a village, shooting unarmed men, women and children and setting fire to houses. The agency specifically denied the accuracy of a state government assertion that only a small number of people had been killed in police cross-fire. The report was an account of police abuses growing out of one of the worst outbursts of sectarian violence in recent years. More than 100 people were reported killed in two days of riots last May 22 and 23 in Meerut district, some 30 miles northeast of New Delhi. Although the organization has issued reviews of the worldwide human rights situation in which it criticized some Indian practices, such as alleged police mistreatment of Sikhs in the northern state of Punjab, it was considered highly unusual for it to produce a separate report for India. The Meerut violence has already shaken the Government and prompted it to start two investigations. Nevertheless, several citizens' groups and spokesmen for Moslems have demanded more steps to reform police and reduce Hindu-Moslem tensions. A Government official said Friday that there would be no comment on the Amnesty International report because a judicial commission had been set up to investigate the charges of police abuse. ''The law should take its course,'' he said. But the official said the Government had acted after the riots to remove the senior command of the police where they occurred, and in general to make the police more representative of all communities in the areas where they patrol. He acknowledged that the provincial police in Meerut were dominated by Hindus and that ''the composition should be more broad-based.'' In Parliament, the opposition demanded a response to the Amnesty International report from the Government of Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi. They walked out of the chamber when the acting speaker refused to direct the Government to issue a statement. The Meerut report marked the second time this year that the police have been accused of failures related to a sectarian riot. Last February, a special judicial commission assailed the police for failing to control anti-Sikh riots after the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 1984. The Amnesty International report focused its criticism on the Provincial Armed Constabulary, a separate local police force under the supervision of the state of Uttar Pradesh. The constabulary was called to assist the regular state police as rioting spread. The agency noted that the constabulary had denied its allegations, and that during its investigation, an Indian official said it was likely that police uniforms were stolen and ''used as a disguise.'' The agency said it ''does not believe this is a credible explanation.'' A separate report on the Meerut incidents was prepared by the Uttar Pradesh Government. It has not been released, but according to one news report it said that the riots were a result of heightened ethnic tensions inflamed by Hindu and Moslem extremists. It said the riots were ''pre-planned'' by organized gangs in both communities. Amnesty International said it based its reports on ''a range of sources that include first-hand accounts from victims or eyewitnesses'' and that it had the names of 29 murder victims and another 32 listed as ''disappeared.'' It said all were Moslems. It quoted one student as testifying that he saw ''young and old men of our locality'' brought to a canal late at night, and that the police ''loaded their rifles and began shooting.'' It said the student was shot in the armpit and escaped by pretending he was dead."
