"Hanoi, saying it is disappointed that progress in the search for Americans missing since the Vietnam War has not elicited ''cooperation and good will'' from the United States, has suddenly shifted to a much harsher public stance toward Washington. The shift, which comes after less than a year of improving relations, raises the possibility that efforts to determine the fate of more than 1,700 Americans still unaccounted for in Vietnam will be halted, according to Hanoi officials. Recent public statements from Hanoi also indicate that the Vietnamese are becoming alarmed at signs of reinvigorated Thai-American military cooperation and the likelihood that more American support will be given to rebels fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government of Cambodia. 'A U.S. Comeback' After Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger toured the Cambodian border area last Tuesday while on a visit to Thailand, the Vietnamese News Agency, envisioning what it called ''a U.S. comeback to Southeast Asia,'' said: ''The military cooperation between Washington and Bangkok is increasing to the dangerous point of reopening U.S. military bases in Thailand. This dangerous policy of Bangkok is directly threatening the fundamental national interests of Thailand.'' On Thursday, Vietnam turned over to the United States the remains of 21 people believed to be missing American servicemen. It was the first repatriation of war dead this year and the third largest since 1975. But in a meeting with reporters today, Deputy Foreign Minister Hoang Bich Son said that ''in the absence of cooperation and goodwill from the United States, a lot of obstacles could be created'' in the search for missing Americans. The Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan has recently begun to attack American officials for what it said were statements indicating the United States was ''ready to use force, if necessary, to free any American prisoners'' in Vietnam. The attacks were apparently a reaction to testimony in Congress by Assistant Secretary of Defense Richard L. Armitage, who said the United States would take ''appropriate action'' if it was determined that the Vietnamese Government was holding Americans in Vietnam. Another article in Nhan Dan criticized the State Department for saying there were violations of human rights in Vietnam. The newspaper called the annual human rights report a ''brazen slander and a manifestation of the U.S. hostile attitude toward the Vietnamese people.'' ''The Washington authorities,'' the article said, ''have spent large amounts of money for propaganda campaigns against Vietnam, the Soviet Union and other socialist countries in hopes of covering up the fact that they themselves are the most brazen violators of human rights in the world.'' Mr. Son, charging that the United States has rejected two sets of Vietnamese proposals for a joint agreement on solving the missing-in-action issue, today called for a written accord between the two nations. He declined to elaborate on what was in the proposals, but the Vietnamese have long sought a two-year timetable for completion of outstanding missing-persons cases. The United States has rejected a written accord in the belief that this would hinder Washington from pursuing the issue after the time limit expired. Mr. Son repeated a charge made earlier this week by Nguyen Can, head of the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry's department of North American affairs, that suggestions by some Americans that the Hanoi Government was holding live Americans had slowed the search process. Hanoi denies that there are any living Americans in the country; Mr. Son said Saturday that he had been misquoted by members of an American delegation that visited Hanoi in February. The group, led by Mr. Armitage, had reported that Mr. Son said some Americans may be living in remote areas without Hanoi's knowledge. A loss of momentum on this issue -coming less than a year after what Washington considered to be a breakthrough with Hanoi - would follow a pattern of ill-fated efforts to resolve problems between the two nations. Among the now-stalemated questions are the Amerasian children and ''re-education'' camp inmates who the Reagan Administration has said it would be willing to resettle in the United States. Also stalled is the Orderly Departure Program, under which Vietnamese leave their country legally for the United States and other Western nations under the auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Causes and Consequences Hanoi has always taken the position that its offer last summer to resolve the missing Americans issue ''within two years'' was strictly a humanitarian gesture. But at the same time, diplomats say, the Vietnamese may have thought that a gesture of good will on their part would quickly be reciprocated by the Americans. Diplomats are almost unanimous in saying that Hanoi still puts a very high priority on getting United States diplomatic recognition. Diplomats also suggest that the steady succession of delegations from the United States coming to Vietnam to discuss the issue of missing Americans might have left Hanoi officials with the impression that this issue was more important to the United States than the continuing Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. The diplomats say it is the Vietnamese presence in Cambodia that has soured relations between Hanoi and most nations outside the Soviet bloc. The United States has taken the same position: that Cambodia is the ultimate issue. A foreigner in Phnom Penh, however, said the Vietnamese are shrewd and experienced readers of American political signals, and may think it possible to extract concessions from Washington ''by playing the M.I.A. card.''"
