"President Reagan, in an action that showed his determination to move away from the Carter Administration's emphasis on human rights as a key factor in foreign policy, agreed in a meeting today with President Chun Doo Hwan to normalize relations with South Korea. Mr. Reagan specifically promised Mr. Chun, whose human rights policies were severely criticized by the previous Administration, that the 39,000 American troops stationed in South Korea would remain there. Following what the White House called a ''friendly'' meeting between Mr. Reagan and Mr. Chun, a senior State Department official made it clear that military ''security,'' not Mr. Chun's domestic policy, was now the main concern in relations between Washington and Seoul. Congressional aides said the Administration had asked Congress to delay publication of a report on human rights violations in nations around the world to avoid embarrassing President Chun. (Page A6.) The issuing of a ''joint communique'' promising full diplomatic, military and economic cooperation between the two countries marked the end of the six-month freeze in American-South Korean relations that the Carter Administration imposed because of Mr. Chun's reliance on martial law and the imprisonment of political rivals. The communique represented a political triumph for Mr. Chun, likely to cement what is regarded as his certain victory in the indirect presidential election to be held this month in South Korea. The State Department official said that Mr. Reagan and Mr. Chun had not discussed the case of Kim Dae Jung, the political dissident whose death sentence was commuted by Mr. Chun on the day after Mr.  Reagan invited the South Korean President to visit the United States. Mr. Kim's imprisonment and conviction for sedition, on charges that the State Department called ''far-fetched,'' was a major factor in the Carter Administration's criticism of the Chun Government. Shift in Approach Made Clear ''It's not the intention of this Administration to go into the internal state of affairs in the Republic of Korea,'' the State Department official said today in one of several statements that made it clear that the Reagan Administration would not continue on the ''rocky road'' followed by the Carter Administration in relations with Seoul. ''I hope you understand the United States will remain a reliable Pacific partner and we shall maintain the strength of our forces in the Pacific area,'' Mr. Reagan said after he and Mrs. Reagan entertained Mr. Chun and his wife at a White House luncheon. ''I am happy to say that President Reagan gave me firm assurances that the United States has no intention of withdrawing the American forces in Korea,'' said Mr. Chun, a small, partly bald former paratroop officer. Mr. Chun arrived at the White House shortly before 11 A.M. during a driving rain. He and Mr. Reagan met for more than an hour and then Mr. Reagan held the luncheon in Mr. Chun's honor, with Vice President Bush, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger and Richard V. Allen, Mr. Reagan's national security adviser, in attendance. Mr. Chun also met privately with Mr. Haig before leaving the White House at 1:45 P.M. Mr. Chun's toast at the White House luncheon seemed to suggest a curtailment of some of the practices that strained Washington-Seoul relations. His country, Mr. Chun said, has ''embarked on a new venture to open a new era.'' He said he foresaw an ''era of dialogue and consensus-building'' with the ''objective of building a freer, more abundant and democratic society in our midst.'' Mr. Reagan, in his toast, told Mr. Chun, ''In the short time that you've had, Mr. President, you've done much to strengthen the tradition of 5,000 years' commitment to freedom.'' Mr. Chun in his remarks also called for ''replacing the old chronic and internecine battle between those who take rigid and extreme positions'' - a remark that could suggest the eventual release of Mr. Kim from prison. Reagan Administration officials said, however, that there was ''no linkage, no quid pro quo, no bargaining'' on such human rights issues involved in the communique issued today. The communique simply promised that the United States and South Korea ''would resume immediately the full range of consultations between the two Governments.'' Mr. Reagan's promise to keep American forces in South Korea reflected his conviction that the United States must help maintain Korean security in the face of a Soviet military buildup in the Western Pacific and a numerically superior North Korean military force, according to the State Department spokesman."
