"A Chinese student leader, wanted by the authorities of his country, asked a United Nations human rights meeting here today to adopt a resolution condemning the killing of democracy demonstrators in June at Tiananmen Square. The Chinese Government representative responded by calling the student a ''criminal'' who was ''personally responsible'' for the bloodshed. The exchange was the first time since the killings more than two months ago that a human rights meeting has begun discussing the subject. Diplomats say the outcome will be an important indication of future international attitudes toward China. ''If a resolution is adopted here, the wording will have an influence on what happens at the General Assembly'' this fall, a Western diplomat said. Resolution Seen as Precedent Officials say that a resolution against China would be a precedent, since neither China nor any of the other four permanent members of the Security Council have ever been criticized in a United Nations human rights resolution. ''It would be a necessary act of courage,'' said Reed Brody of the Geneva-based International Commission of Jurists. ''Necessary because the situation clearly warrants it, and courageous because China is an important power, which has always had the support of the third world majority.'' Today's exchange took place at the annual meeting of a United Nations subcommission on human rights that is made up of 26 legal experts from around the world. The experts are in theory independent, but in reality many are subject to pressure from their own governments. China's violent repression of the pro-democracy movement is expected to be one of the most closely watched issues at the subcommission's four-week meeting, which is to end Sept. 1. Tells of Demonstration The meeting was addressed today by Li Lu, a 23-year-old economics student from Nanjing University. He said he had escaped from China shortly after the killings, and had been granted asylum by France. He said he was on the Chinese authorities' list of 21 most wanted persons. Mr. Li told the group that he had been deputy director of the hunger strike committee of the students at Tiananmen Square. He said he was on the square June 4 and witnessed the onslaught of the troops. ''In order to block the progress of the tanks and army trucks, people lay down in their path,'' he said. ''The people would not believe they were being hit by real bullets. In fact, they were dum-dum bullets.'' Later, Chinese Government observer, Zhang Yishan, told the meeting that Mr. Li was ''a criminal, wanted by the security organs of a member state of the United Nations.'' In a statement, Amnesty International asked the subcommission to take action against such ''atrocities.'' The statement said that international observers were not being allowed to attend the trials of those charged in the pro-democracy movement. ----China Pulls Out of Program WASHINGTON, Aug. 16 - The Chinese Government has told the United States that it will no longer take part in the Fulbright academic exchange program, a spokesman for the United States Information Agency said today. The Fulbright program sends 24 American professors to teach in China each year in exchange for 24 Chinese students and scholars who study at American universities. The Chinese Government notified the United States Embassy in Beijing of its decision on Tuesday, said W. B. Reinckens, the spokesman for the United States International Agency, which administers the Fulbright program. Besides the Fulbright, many colleges and universities across the United States have their own exchange and scholarship programs with China. Some of these have also been suspended. Shortly after the violent suppression of student protests in Tiananmen Square, the National Academy of Sciences suspended its three major exchange programs to protest the Chinese Government's actions."
