"The Roman Catholic Bishop of East Timor, saying claims that human rights abuses had ended were ''lying propaganda,'' has accused the Indonesian Government of continuing to practice torture in the region. In his strongest statement against the Indonesian authorities since he was appointed head of the church in East Timor in 1983, the Bishop, Msgr. Carlos Filipe Belo, accused the authorities in Jakarta of barbarism. East Timor, a former Portuguese colony, was invaded by Indonesia in 1975. The United Nations still recognizes Portuguese administration, but the United States recognizes Indonesian sovereignty. The invasion produced accusations of widespread brutality. Human rights organizations, including Amnesty International and the Catholic Institute of International Relations, have said in the years since that as many as 200,000 of the 650,000 people may have died as a direct result of the invasion and the suppression of armed resistance, which has continued intermittently. Monsignor Belo's statement followed a roundup of East Timorese when President Suharto of Indonesia visited the region in November. Jakarta-based journalists reported that about 3,000 East Timorese had been arrested. Monsignor Belo said that arrests had been made in Dili, the capital, and the towns of Baucau, Lospalos and Viqueque, and that although most people had been freed, some were still detained. East Timorese exiles in Portugal said seven or eight were still in prison. In his statement, which he ordered to be read in churches throughout East Timor, the Bishop said criminal interrogations ''accompanied by blows, kickings and beatings'' were ''the norm in Timor.'' ''We disagree with this barbaric system and condemn the lying propaganda according to which abuses of human rights do not exist in East Timor,'' the statement said. The document was dated Dec. 5 but only now reached Lisbon, having been carried out of the territory by church officials. Exiles and human rights organizations say postal services and telephone communications have been censored since 1975. Monsignor Belo has been criticized by the East Timorese liberation movement, known by its Portuguese acronym, Fretilin, and by young, radical Catholics, who regard him as pro-Indonesian, largely because of the circumstances of his appointment. He replaced the popular Martinho Lopes da Costa, who was forced to retire in 1983 after Indonesia complained to the Vatican of his nationalistic sermons."
