"President Ferdinand E. Marcos likes to refer to Abraham Lincoln when he talks about the extra-judicial powers of arrest and detention he has arrogated to himself. ''After Fort Sumter, he arrested some people,'' Mr. Marcos remarked the other day. President Marcos says the term ''political prisoners'' is ''not quite true'' and that the number now in detention is ''less than a hundred.'' But human rights groups here say that hundreds of people have been arrested on his order since a law authorizing preventive detention was enacted two years ago. In a report on human rights in the Philippines issued earlier this month, the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights noted these arrests as a central problem in a human rights situation that has worsened significantly over the last two years. Now Mr. Marcos is seeking re-election Feb. 7, and how he has dealt with his opponents is an issue in the campaign being waged against him by Corazon Aquino, whose husband, Benigno S. Aquino Jr., was assassinated in 1983 as he returned from three years of exile in the United States. Mrs. Aquino and her supporters have charged Mr. Marcos with a role in the killing and have threatened to try him if she is elected. The Lawyers Committee report supported charges by independent lawyers and church groups here who say that disappearances, torture and killings by both Government and Communist insurgent forces have increased, and that the numbers of political prisoners have risen to an estimated 600. Many of these prisoners have been charged simply with ''subversion,'' the group said, asserting that few have received fair trials. Many others, it said, have been detained indefinitely under the Preventive Detention Action that gives the President the right to bypass the court system. ''Thus when a judge concludes that there is not enough evidence to put someone in jail,'' the report said, ''the military can - and frequently does - go to President Marcos'' for a detention order. The President, in a recent interview, described the use of detention orders differently. ''In the event that some kind of a corrupt judge releases somebody suddenly,'' he said, ''we have a second chance to prevent him from causing damage to our country.'' Sister Christine Tan, a Catholic activist who lives and works in a Manila slum, described acts by the military in the dark alleys of the city that go beyond presidential arrests. ''They just don't like your face, or they think you are a Communist,'' she said, ''so they kill you.'' The situation has worsened in the past year, according to Joker Arroyo, a prominent human rights lawyer. Mr. Arroyo said not only the poor, but professional people were affected as well. Five lawyers who, like him, have defended human rights cases, are now in prison, and three have been killed in the past 12 months. He said church workers, journalists and others who attempt to defend human rights or monitor their violations have also become targets in a campaign by the Government to deprive its victims of their only defense. The book-length report of the Lawyers Committee is the result of a year of work, including three visits to the Philippines by members of the public-interest group. Its executive director, Michael Posner, said in a telephone interview from New York that his delegation investigated more than 100 cases and talked to a cross section of sources, including victims, Supreme Court justices, the Minister of Justice, lawyers, religious workers and business leaders. It is one of a number of reports that have been issued in recent months by various groups investigating human rights abuses, which are considered to be a central factor fueling a growing insurgency throughout the country. Complaints about human rights abuses are also often central to political demonstrations, where placards denouncing the ''U.S.-Marcos dictatorship'' jostle signs demanding to know the whereabouts of activist priests who have disappeared. Mr. Marcos has raised the possibility that he might review the so-called Preventive Detention Action in a new administration. But in the interview, he said there were limits to his ability to divest himself of his supra-legal powers. ''It's actually part of both law and decree,'' he said, ''so it requires action not only on my part, but possibly even an amendment to the Constitution.'' Although Mr. Marcos ended nine years of martial law in 1981, he retained many of his martial law powers, particularly through Amendment Six to the Constitution, which allows him to issue ''decrees, orders or letters of instruction which shall form part of the law of the land.'' Since the amendment was enacted in 1976, Mr. Marcos has issued more than 900 decrees and orders, among which were two in 1983 that empowered him to order the arrest and detention of as long as one year of anyone who ''in his judgment'' threatens public safety. While in custody, according to the report by the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights, prisoners are often subjected to torture that includes electric shock, choking, suffocating, rape, mutilation, severe beating, burning and forced submersion in water. It said the number of ''disappearances,'' or illegal abductions of civilians by Government forces, had also increased in the last year. In the first 10 months of 1985, it said, a church group had monitored 600 such cases, ''a dramatic increase over the 158 disappearances it reported in 1984.''"
