"The recent indictment of South Korea's most prominent opposition figure on charges of violating national security laws has spread bitterness in political circles and raised new concerns among many Koreans about the Government's actions to suppress dissent. The opposition politician, Kim Dae Jung, who was indicted last month, has not been imprisoned and remains free to conduct business as president of the Party of Peace and Democracy, the largest political party in the National Assembly, the main legislative body. Indeed, officials say privately that he is unlikely to be jailed, even if found guilty. But Mr. Kim and other opposition politicians are citing the indictment as evidence that President Roh Tae Woo is not as committed as many people once thought to fostering free expression while South Korea makes its transition to democracy after decades of authoritarian military rule. 'Reverting to Old Habits' ''The motivation for this indictment is very simple,'' Mr. Kim said in an interview. ''Roh Tae Woo is reverting to old habits. He is determined to destroy our party and myself. That's why they have fabricated these charges against me.'' The United States has kept silent on the indictment. But American officials were described as uneasy about the charges, which a Western diplomat described as ''flimsy'' and others said appeared to be an effort to intimidate some in the opposition. American officials are also understood to be concerned that the Government has arrested hundreds of dissidents in recent months on other violations of national security laws, in some cases for possessing ''subversive'' literature or because of links to suspected dissidents. Indictment's Delicate Timing Under President Chun Doo Hwan, the Government initiated democratic changes in 1987 in response to a wave of anti-Government protests. Mr. Roh, a former army general who was Mr. Chun's handpicked successor, then won the presidential election in December 1987 with 37 percent of the vote against a divided opposition. But the opposition formed a coalition after that defeat and was able to win control of the National Assembly in elections held in February 1988. The timing of Mr. Kim's indictment is especially delicate because Mr. Roh plans to visit President Bush at the White House next month. Aides to Mr. Roh defend the indictment, saying the evidence is strong that Mr. Kim had, perhaps unwittingly, become dangerously involved with politicians and dissidents who have developed ties with North Korea, which remains in a state of war with South Korea. ''This indictment places no restrictions on Kim's activities,'' said Hyun Hong Choo, Minister of Legislation in Mr. Roh's Cabinet. ''It does not lessen our support for an independent judiciary and a free press. But frankly, the prosecution has a good case against him.'' At its heart is the disclosure in June that a legislator in Mr. Kim's party, Suh Kyong Won, made a secret illegal trip to North Korea in 1988. The indictment charges that Mr. Roh failed to report the trip as soon as he learned about it, and also accepted $10,000 from North Korea, handed over by Mr. Suh. The disclosure about Mr. Suh's trip had an explosive effect in a country that has deeply mixed feelings toward its northern neighbor, on the one hand yearning for reunification and reconciliation, on the other nurturing deep anxiety about Pyongyang's motivations. No Thaw in Relations Earlier this year, there was much talk of warmer relations with North Korea, but lately Mr. Roh's Government has asserted that Pyongyang wants reconciliation only on its own terms, which include demands for immediate expulsion of the 44,000 American troops from South Korea. In addition, the Government feels North Korea has been behind a wave of strikes, anti-Government riots and other disruptions of recent months. Spokesmen for dissident groups say that more than 900 people have been arrested in the resulting Government crackdown. The Government said Mr. Kim's indictment was based in part on a confession from Mr. Suh. But Mr. Suh recanted his confession, saying he was tortured by being deprived of sleep and forced to stand for five days. No Stranger to Arrest Mr. Kim is no stranger to arrest, imprisonment and worse in South Korea. He spent six years in jail, seven years under house arrest and three years in voluntary exile, and survived several attempts on his life before returning to South Korea in 1985 to work for changing the system. His party draws strength from militant workers and students, but Mr. Kim often proclaims his own opposition to violence, Communism and anti-Americanism. He asserts that he got no money from Mr. Suh and knew nothing of his trip until June, when his party quickly reported it to the authorities. But even some politicians friendly to Mr. Kim feel that he blundered by not cooperating with investigators when they initially summoned him to ask about Mr. Suh's trip. An Impasse in the Assembly The indictment also marks a rupture between President Roh and the opposition in the National Assembly, which up to now has cooperated with the Government in many ways. Mr. Kim and other opposition leaders, for example, supported Mr. Roh's decision not to have a midterm referendum on his policies and have generally asked for patience among their supporters to let the President prove himself in office. But there has been a persistent stalemate between the opposition and Mr. Roh over how far to go in dismantling the old police state apparatus and laws, including the national security laws under which Mr. Kim was indicted. Sending Kim a Message In addition, the impasse is over whom to punish for the excesses of the past, particularly the Kwangju massacre of 1980, in which hundreds died as the police and army troops crushed a student rebellion. Mr. Chun, a general who took power in a military coup in 1979 and assumed the presidency in 1980, is widely held responsible for the Kwangju killings. Because of his close ties to Mr. Chun and his own background as a military officer, Mr. Roh is still regarded with suspicion by dissidents and student radicals. Aides to Mr. Roh acknowledge that the indictment was intended to send Mr. Kim a general message not to be so cozy with student militants demanding an overthrow of the Government."
