"For generations few people, except missionaries from the Moravian Church, knew much about the Miskito Indians who lived in in Nicaragua's Atlantic Coast region. But in the last eight months, the Miskitos have found themselves in the center of controversy - the target of the Nicaraguan Government, which has charged that some of their leaders are subversives, and the focus of attention by the United States, which uses their case as an example of what it sees as human rights abuses. Disrupted by border warfare, displaced by Nicaraguan attempts to resettle and integrate them, and sometimes motivated by a desire to join Nicaraguans in exile, about 15,000 of the 125,000 Miskitos have fled to Honduras. Most of them are struggling to survive in a grim refugee camp near here. Officials from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees are trying to resettle them on inhabited, fertile land near here. Officials believe that the relocation, in addition to fostering self-suffiency, would reduce the epidemics arising in the squalid conditions at Mocoron. Some Resist Relocation Plans The relocation plans have been resisted by some of the Indian leaders, including Steadman Fagoth Muller, who has toured the United States to make a case against the Nicaraguan Government's treatment of the Indians. The relief workers believe that he and others who share his view are opposed on the ground that it will be easier to keep world attention on the Miskito issue if they are kept in a group. ''Their presence is an embarrasment to the Nicaraguans,'' a relief worker said. American officials focused attention on the issue last winter by charging that the Nicaraguans were engaging in genocide against the Indians. Under the regime of Anastasio Somoza Debayle, the Indians were left alone. After his overthrow in 1979, the new Sandinist Government in Nicaragua decided to end their isolation. According to Sifrit Williams, a 52-year-old leader of Miskito refugees who wants to overthrow the Sandinists, the Miskitos generally perferred the Somoza Government because it did not intrude in their lives. Sandinists Press Literacy Drive Mr. Williams said the Sandinists have, as part of a nationwide literacy campaign, sent in Cubans, whom the Miskitos mistrusted, to teach Spanish to the Indians, whose second language was often English, a language they learned from missionaries or inherited from English-speaking Caribbean peoples who settled along their coast. The Sandinists, Mr. Williams said, also tried to persuade the Indians to form cooperatives. Indians, who engaged in communal farming were nevertheless not amenable to having socialism forced on them, he said. ''The socialist system goes against their grain,'' said Brian Adam, a soft-spoken, 27-year-old volunteer for World Relief, an evangelical orgnization. He is the only one of some 50 relief workers here who speaks Miskito, which he learned as a child. He learned it during the first 12 years of his life when he lived with his Moravian missionary parents among the Indians in Nicargua and Honduras. From his parents and other missionaries, Mr. Adam said, the Miskitos acquired ''pro-Western, pro-American'' values. In accusing the Sandinists of human rights abuses, Reagan Administration officials have relied in part on Miskitos' accounts of an incident on Dec. 23 last year. On that day, according to some refugee leaders, Sandinist soldiers massacred about 100 Miskitos, including women and children, in the Nicaraguan border town of Leimus. But international relief workers here, including Peace Corps volunteers, say that the attack may have been provoked when a force of some 200 armed Miskito men left the Mocoron refugee to take part in a raid on Leimus. A battle ensued, according to the relief workers, ''not more than 70,'' were killed. Whatever happened at Leimus, it has been followed by increased military activity in the areas of Nicaragua populated by Indians. The Sandinists have concentrated much of their military buildup in the area. Once in Honduras, some relief workers suggest, it is easy for the Miskitos to be used by leaders who want to topple the Sandinist Government. One of the most outspoken of those is Mr. Fagoth. ''God has shown him his path,'' said Mr. Williams as he sat on the shaky patio of La Perla, a run-down waterfront bar in Puerto Lempira. Sitting in this same bar in June, Mr. Fagoth miraculously escaped death when someone threw a grenade and opened up with automatic rifle fire. Food Diverted to Guerrillas Mr. Fagoth and Mr. Williams have allied themselves with the ''Somocistas,'' as former soldiers of General Somoza's National Guard are called. Asked if young Miskito men had joined the ''Somocistas,'' Mr.  Williams, whose wrinkled, leather-skinned face had remained expressionless as he talked about the Sandinists, answered flatly, ''not that I am aware.'' But then a grin broke between his sunken jaws, and his bony fingers tried to stifle a laugh.  According to the relief workers, food and supplies intended for the refugees are often diverted to the Somocista guerrilla camps, which, they said, operated from bases at Rus Rus, Srumlaya and Cabo de Gracias a Dios. In one instance, they said, all but a very small amount of a large shipment of food, clothing and medicines donated by the fire department in Houston, Tex., for the Mocoron refugees ended up in the possession of the counterrevolutionaries, as the anti-Sandinist forces are frequently called, after being unloaded at Puerto Lempira. According to the relief workers, Honduran army officers are providing arms and training for the counterrevolutionaries."
