"If his wish to be electrocuted is carried out as scheduled early Monday morning, Steven T. Judy, a 24-year-old convicted murderer, will become the fourth person to be executed since the United States Supreme Court revived the death penalty in 1976. Mr. Judy, who has joked about his execution, was sentenced to death for raping and strangling Terry Lee Chasteen, 21, and drowning her three young children in April 1979. Last night, at a news conference at the Indiana State Prison here, Mr. Judy said that he had no regrets about the murders and felt that being put to death was preferable to a sentence of life in prison. ''I don't lose sleep over it,'' he said of the murders. ''It's just something that happened. I'm not sorry for the things I've done. I've lived my life the only way I know how.'' Of the death penalty, he said, ''If that was the punishment that was handed out, it should be carried out.  ''I'm just kind of glad it is over with,'' he added. Refused to File Appeal The former Indianapolis construction worker has refused to appeal his sentence, saying that he could not be sure he would not kill again if he was ever released and that he did not want to spend the rest of his life in prison. ''I'm the type of person that needs freedom,'' he said last night.  ''Once that's taken away, then essentially you have taken life away from me.'' Yesterday the United States Supreme Court, by a 7-to-2 vote, turned down an emergency request by Larry Williams, another convicted murderer on Indiana's death row, for a stay of Mr. Judy's sentence.  Mr. Williams had asked for a stay until he had had a chance to challenge the constitutionality of the state's death penalty. His attorneys argued that Mr. Judy's execution ''will have an inhibiting effect on the Indiana Supreme Court's acceptance of Williams's argument against the constitutionality of the statute.'' But the Court, with dissents from Justices Thurgood Marshall and William J. Brennan Jr., who oppose capital punishment, ruled that Mr. Williams had no standing to act in Mr. Judy's behalf. Governor Refused to Intervene The Indiana Clemency Commission yesterday rejected an appeal by the American Civil Liberties Union to halt the execution, and the organization said the action had exhausted all apparent means of stopping it. The organization and a group of ministers had also asked Gov.  Robert D. Orr to commute Mr. Judy's sentence to life imprisonment.  Amnesty International, the London-based human rights organization, initiated a campaign that resulted in nearly 700 letters appealing for clemency being sent to the Governor's office. But Governor Orr, a supporter of capital punishment, said he could ''find no reason under the sun'' to change his position. Mr. Judy, the product of a broken home in which his parents were alcoholics and often fought, began to run afoul of the law at an early age. He was committed to Central State Hospital at the age of 13 after he raped a woman, then stabbed her with a knife and struck her with a hatchet. He was subsequently charged with sexual assault against three other women and robbing a fourth. On Parole When Arrested At the time of his arrest for the slaying of Mrs. Chasteen, Mr.  Judy was on parole in Illinois and was free on bond in Indiana on a robbery charge. His father is an escapee from the prison where he is housed. At his trial Mr. Judy confessed that he got Mrs. Chasteen to stop her automobile by signaling that his automobile had a flat tire. He then disabled her vehicle by removing the ignition wire. He offered Mrs. Chasteen and her children a ride but took them to a secluded spot, where he committed the murders. Mr. Judy's execution would be the first in Indiana since 1961, when Richard Kiefer, a Fort Wayne mechanic, was put to death for killing his wife in a dispute over money. Three persons have been executed in the United States since the 1976 Supreme Court decision: Gary Mark Gilmore, 36, who was shot by a firing squad in Utah on Jan. 17, 1977; John Spenkelink, 30, electrocuted in Florida on May 25, 1979, and Jesse W. Bishop, 46, who died in the Nevada gas chamber Oct. 22, 1979. Each of the men had been convicted of murder. Eight women and 731 men are on death rows in the United States, more than 500 of them in Deep South states, according to a 50-state survey by The Associated Press. In October 1979, at the time of the most recent execution, there were 559 men and six women on death rows."
