"To the Editor:  Americans who value justice and fairness must be shocked by the remarks of the civil-liberties lawyer Floyd Abrams and his delegation from the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights about conditions inside Kampuchea, formerly Cambodia, (''Hanoi Linked to Cambodian Torture,'' Nov. 15). Mr. Abrams visited the camps of the Khmer Rouge forces of the deposed Pol Pot Government in Thailand and interviewed Ieng Sary, Pol Pot's Prime Minister and successor as head of the bloody Khmer Rouge, but did not visit Kampuchea. Nevertheless, he feels competent to say, ''In Cambodia, there simply does not exist the recognition of civil liberties or human rights on a basis recognized by the world community.'' As three attorneys who visited Kampuchea last summer as a delegation of the National Lawyers Guild, we reached far different conclusions. In Kampuchea today, the meager resources of the Government have been devoted to rebuilding the social, economic and legal fabric of the society that had been totally destroyed by Pol Pot. Our interviews inside the country and meetings with Ministry of Justice and other officials (including ex-Khmer Rouge) who had lived through these years of terror and human-rights abuses revealed a firm commitment to guaranteeing a system of legality and individual rights to prevent recurrence of the lawlessness of the Pol Pot era.  Starting with fewer than six lawyers who survived the Pol Pot years, a constitution containing human- rights guarantees similar to our own was enacted in 1980. In 1982, a court system was established throughout the country. A penal code and other laws have been passed, which provide for due process and the right of appeal. The use of the death penalty has been severely restricted. In fact, we were informed that there have been a total of two executions during the five years of the current government.  It is regrettable that Mr. Abrams, who has represented the best traditions of responsible journalism, would rely on sources such as the self-serving statements of Ieng Sary and refugees under control of his discredited Khmer Rouge. VICKI ERENSTEIN JEFFREY HAAS, FRANKLIN SIEGEL New York, Nov. 26, 1984"
