"At least 25 Tamil separatist guerrillas were killed in fierce fighting between two rival rebel groups over the weekend in Sri Lanka, residents and military sources said today. Residents said the men died when the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, a guerrilla group that has been trying to establish its supremacy, clashed with the rival Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front in the island's northern and eastern areas. Military sources said the Liberation Tigers, the most powerful of the four main guerrilla groups fighting for a separate state, had lost 8 of its fighters and killed 17 of its rivals in the battles that erupted Saturday night. Residents said 10 members of the Liberation Front were killed in a gunfight in the eastern district of Batticaloa today. Four others were reported shot dead at Chavakachcheri in Northern Province. The Liberation Tigers said over loudspeakers today in their northern stronghold of Jaffna that the Liberation Front had been defeated and warned those still holding out to surrender, residents said. The Liberation Tigers also said that they had captured more than 30 Liberation Front camps in Jaffna and that 300 members of the group had surrendered. Residents said that fighting had stopped in Jaffna but that battles continued today in the Eastern Province.  Officials of the Sri Lankan Government and representatives of the human rights group Amnesty International met in New York Saturday to discuss reports by the London-based group of increasing numbers of Sri Lankan ''disappearances'' at the hands of security forces in that country. The reports list more than 300 people who have reportedly been seized by security forces over the past two years. At the meeting, Amnesty officials distributed a list of 23 more such people in the last several weeks. Lalith Athulathmudali, the Sri Lankan Minister of National Security, called the reports ''naive'' and accused the rights group of clinging to ''terms of reference that were appropriate in 1950, in a pre-terrorist world, but are frightfully outdated now.'' He said that the reports gave the impression that the atrocities they document are solely the fault of the Government but that most of the disappearances could actually be attributed to the Tamil insurgents. Mike Jendrzejczyk, a spokesman for Amnesty International, said the reports were accurate and did not ignore atrocities by the rebels."
