"The leading State Department expert on China today denied charges by lawmakers from both parties that the Administration had taken China's side in the recent unrest in Tibet. J. Stapleton Roy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs, told a joint hearing of two House Foreign Affairs subcommittees that he took ''strong issue'' with the view expressed by some lawmakers that the State Department was responding ''in a spineless fashion'' to the outbreak of violence last month. ''We have spoken out on the recent spate of violence in Tibet,'' Mr. Roy said, adding, ''We have made clear our concern for the situation.'' Mr. Roy was responding to sharp criticism from most of the subcommittee members that the State Department had failed to condemn human rights violations in Tibet. His defense of State Department policy follows an acknowledgment by Secretary of State George P. Shultz on Tuesday of some human rights violations in Tibet. ''We deplore it, and we don't make any bones about that fact,'' he told a House Foreign Affairs Committee hearing. During anti-Chinese demonstrations, which began on Sept. 27, at least 15 people were reported killed in clashes with the police. Since then, the Chinese authorities have reinforced the police in Tibet and have expelled all foreign journalists from the region. On Oct. 6, the Administration criticized a resolution passed unanimously by the Senate that condemned the Chinese for their actions in Tibet. Today's hearing highlighted the divergent positions on Tibet taken by the Administration and members of Congress. Not one member of Congress supported the Administration's response to the recent violence, and many were highly critical. In answer to repeated questions about whether the State Department intended to press China to improve its human rights record, Mr. Roy, who was born in China to missionary parents, advocated a low-key approach that he said would have more effect because it would not be interpreted by the Chinese as interference in their internal affairs. He said, ''I draw a distinction between putting into words our concerns over human rights abuses and telling the Chinese how to run their affairs.'' He faulted recent House and Senate actions that condemned China for its human rights record on the ground they cited abuses that occurred many years ago, and because they failed to acknowledge Chinese ''efforts to improve the situation or the positive things which the Dalai Lama has himself acknowledged.'' The Dalai Lama, the exiled Tibetan leader, is considered to be both the spiritual and political leader of Tibetan Buddhists. Strain Arose From Visit Much of the strain between Congress and the State Department on Tibet stems from his visit to Washington last month in which he unveiled a five-point plan that included the withdrawal of Chinese forces from Tibet and negotiations on the region's future. The Dalai Lama's proposal was hailed by leading lawmakers as a historic peace-making gesture and attacked by the State Department as an inappropriate political message. The Administration takes the position that Tibet is an integral part of China. The Chinese authorities have condemned the Congressional actions as interference in China's internal affairs and have said they risk damaging United States-China relations, which the Nixon, Carter and Reagan administrations have taken pains to cultivate. The State Department disavowed the Dalai Lama's plan, Mr. Roy said, because it was ''a political program advanced by a man who is the head of a government-in-exile,'' which, he added, neither the Unied States Government nor any other government recognizes. He said the State Department would oppose a plan by Representative Tom Lantos, Democrat of California, to give the exile government observer status at the United Nations, such as the Palestine Liberation Organization has."
