"The Philippine armed forces Chief of Staff recommended today the immediate release of 33 political prisoners detained under the Marcos regime. President Corazon C. Aquino is now considering the recommendation, according to Maj. Cris Maralit, a spokesman for the office of Gen. Fidel V. Ramos, the Chief of Staff. He said the cases of 400 other prisoners were under review. The Government and human rights groups put the total number of political prisoners still under detention at between 500 and 800. Major Maralit said earlier reports that some political prisoners had been released were incorrect. The issue of the continued detention of political prisoners could be a troublesome one for the new Government, officials acknowledge, since it could bring criticism from international human rights groups. On Wednesday, the issue of provoked a small demonstration by prisoners' relatives outside the building where President Aquino held her first news conference. Prisoners' Release Demanded The groups of several dozen demonstrators, several nuns among them, held up signs saying ''Free All Political Prisoners.'' Late that eveneing, the Government-run television station announced that a military task force would be meeting through the night to prepare a list of prisoners by Thursday. The station did not say at that point how many prisoners were being held, but said the new administration hoped to release ''about 50 percent'' of them. Wednesday's demonstrators, members of the Task Force for Political Detainees, said there were still 796 political prisoners scattered around the country. The figure supplied by the Task Force, which is known to have links to the political left and the objectivity of which is sometimes questioned, is higher than the total number of detainees listed by some national and international human rights groups. A Pattern of Abuses The New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights said in a study in December that ''about 600'' people remained in detention. The report found that detentions, many of them lengthy, were only part of a pattern of abuses that also included murders by members of the armed forces, and ''disappearances.'' President Aquino and her press spokesman, Rene Saguisag, a lawyer who has represented detainees, would not put a figure on the number of prisoners during the news conference Wednesday. But after the formal session, Mr. Saguisag indicated that the Government thought the number was between 500 and 600. Mrs. Aquino deflected a question on the subject to her Defense Minister, Juan Ponce Enrile, who said that he had directed his staff to ''make a canvas.'' Mr. Enrile, who was also Defense Minister under Mr. Marcos until resigning and joining a rebellion against the former President last weekend, said he was familiar with many of the cases and had already recommended some releases. Mrs. Aquino added that she had instructed General Ramos to remove officers who were thought to be responsible for human-rights violations. She said she particularly had in mind the situation in Tarlac, her home province. 'A Little Breathing Room' ''If action in regard to many urgent matters is not as quick as would be wished,'' Mr. Saguisag said, pleading for patience, ''we ask for a little breathing room.'' He said he hoped that the Government could ''comply as soon as possible'' with Mrs. Aquino's previously stated promise to free political prisoners. ''Too many things have to be done at the same time,'' Mr. Saguisag said. Until less than 24 hours ago, the spokesman added, members of the new government did not know if they themselves would be jailed, ''or whether we would live or die.'' Outside the hall, Emiliana Yari, the mother of a detainee, was skeptical. ''It depends on what the Government means by patience,'' she said. ''Are they just going to study this, or are they going to begin taking action.'' Mrs. Yari said her 32-year-old son Carlos, a taxi driver who had once been a student activist, was arrested on suspicion of subversion four years ago. The family was not allowed to see him for two weeks after his detention, during which time, he later told them, he had been tortured. 'The Water Cure' ''They used electric shock,'' his mother said. ''They also used what they called the water cure - forcing water down his throat with a hose, then standing on his stomach.'' Mrs. Yari said that her son, whom she is able to visit regularly once or twice a week, still suffers the effects of the damage to his digestive system. In a letter delivered to Mrs. Aquino Wednesday, 13 political prisoners from a Manila detention center wrote: ''We are hopeful that under your regime, our people will realize the justice, freedom and democracy that has eluded all of us since the imposition of martial law in this country.'' Saying they too wanted to join in the celebrations greeting the downfall of Mr. Marcos, the prisoners said: ''The closing down of all the prison cells of political detainees all over the country will be the most graphic and fitting symbol of the new Government's espousal of justice, democracy and respect for human rights.''"
