"Amnesty International accused the Chinese Government today of ordering the secret execution of dissidents, and a United Nations human-rights panel debated a move to censure China for its suppression of the democracy movement. In a telex sent to Prime Minister Li Peng appealing for clemency, Amnesty International said it had evidence that the Chinese authorities decided in early June to execute many of those involved in the student uprising but to announce only enough executions to frighten other dissidents. The group said it had received reports of a secret directive issued by the Communist Party Central Committee known as Document No. 3, which ordered the death sentence for ''counterrevolutionaries'' who have committed ''the most serious crimes.'' It quoted the directive as saying that ''the number of executed and imprisoned people is not to be published'' but that a few death sentences should be revealed ''in order to make examples.'' Censure of Beijing Is Weighed Although several dozen executions have been announced by the Chinese authorities since the June crackdown, Amnesty International said the reports about Document No. 3 had heightened its fear that many more people have been shot or sentenced to long terms of imprisonment in secret. The accusations were timed to coincide with the closing sessions of a monthlong meeting of the United Nations Subcommission on the Prevention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities, which has the task of assessing reports of ''gross and persistent'' human rights violations ''from all available sources.'' The subcommission is to present a list of offenders to the Human Rights Commission when it meets next March. The subcommission, which is made of 26 members appointed by their governments, is examining a draft resolution censuring China for human rights abuses in connection with the student uprising. Its deliberations, which have included testimony from a student leader who fled to the West, are the first examination of China's recent human rights record by a United Nations agency. #1,000 Are Reported Killed On Thursday the subcommission is to vote on a resolution expressing ''concern'' about events in China and their ''consequences in the field of human rights.'' The resolution asks the full Human Rights Commission to review the charges against China again next year on the basis on a new report prepared by Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar. Officials say it is the first time that any United Nations human rights group has considered a resolution criticizing one of the five permanent members of the Security Council. The report by Amnesty International says that security forces killed at least 1,000 civilians in the June crackdown in Beijing, and that 300 were killed in the southern city of Chengdu. ''Some were shot in the back among crowds of people running away from troops firing at them,'' the report says. ''Some were crushed to death by military vehicles. Those killed included children and old people.'' China has denied any massacre of demonstrators by its troops. Appeal for the Imprisoned Amnesty International said it believed that tens of thousands had been arrested since June. ''Amnesty International appeals to the international community to protect the thousands of Chinese who face execution or long imprisonment after unfair trials in the wake of the June massacre, the report says. Officials say the subcommission vote here on Thursday is certain to be close. If the resolution is carried, it is certain to encourage further debate not only at next year's full commission meeting but also at the annual session of the General Assembly, which opens in New York next month. China is working to defeat the resolution, diplomats and subcommission members say."
