"Human-rights abuses in South Korea have sharply risen since Secretary of State George P. Shultz visited Seoul three weeks ago and praised President Chun Doo Hwan, two human-rights organizations said last week. The two groups, the Korean Institute for Human Rights and the North American Coalition for Human Rights in Korea, both based near Washington, said they had received reports that more than 50 people had been arrested without charge since Mr. Shultz's visit May 7 and that more than two dozen people had been tortured. ''Secretary Shultz praised the Chun Government in its fine job on democratization in Korea and did not mention at all the human-rights violations,'' said Sim Kisop, a spokesman for the Korean Institute for Human Rights. As a result, Mr. Sim said, ''the Chun regime thinks the United States Government doesn't care about the human rights situation, and Chun thinks he can do anything.'' A State Department spokesman said he was not aware of any increase in human-rights abuses in South Korea, but added, ''There are human-rights abuses there, and we oppose them.'' Embassy Spokesman Comments A spokesman for the South Korean Embassy in Washington, Ahn Young Mo, denied that security forces were involved in acts of torture. He said: ''Korean police are strictly ordered not to use any illegal interrogation methods. If it is found in any case that a policeman uses illegal methods, he should be prosecuted.'' At a news conference en route to Seoul, Secretary Shultz said: ''Abuses of human rights in the form of treatment of prisoners and things of that kind we obviously oppose. But I think it's very important for people to take in the message that there is a terrific job being done in security, the economy and an impressive movement going on in terms of democracy.'' The human-rights groups said even before Mr. Shultz's visit, there had been frequent rights violations. More than 1,500 activists have been arrested and imprisoned since last September, they said, and many of those have not been charged or permitted to see lawyers or relatives. Since Mr. Shultz's visit, an average of 10 students have been arrested each day, the groups added. Some of those have been released. The charges of rights violations come amid growing unrest over the opposition's efforts to revise the Constitution before presidential elections are held in 1988, when President Chun has promised to step down. Opposition groups want the Constitution changed to require popular elections so that President Chun cannot indirectly pick his successor through the electoral college system. On May 23, Han Hwa Gup, an aide to Kim Dae Jung, was arrested by security forces when he returned to Seoul from the United States, and he was questioned for six days about his meetings abroad, the rights groups said. The human-rights groups cited incidents of torture involving 7 members of a labor organization, 5 student activists and 14 publishers. ''Some of these political prisoners attempted suicide because of intolerable and inhuman treatments,'' Mr. Sim said. He said the torture used against prisoners included electric shocks, a hot pepper solution poured into the nose and mouth and questioning while the prisoners are hanging upside down. ----Youths Battle the Police CHUNJU, South Korea, May 31 (UPI) - Thousands of youths, enraged by a purported compromise between dissident leaders and President Chun Doo Hwan over a parliamentary system of government, hurled gasoline bombs and yelled anti-American slogans today in a clash with the police. The demonstrators demand direct presidential elections, not any plan to create a parliament. Policemen firing tear gas dispersed the youths in 10 minutes and arrested 15, including 9 college students, in the demonstration at Chunju, 125 miles south of Seoul. But the 5,000 demonstrators regrouped in back streets and battled the police."
