"The South Korean Government has announced that it will investigate the treatment of a college student who died when he was being questioned by the police last week. Relatives and others say the student may have been tortured, and the United States Government has expressed concern about the matter. Two human rights organizations, Asia Watch and the Korean Institute for Human Rights, asserted Friday that the student might have died of wounds sustained from torture and that a Government investigation was not likely to produce credible findings. In Washington, the State Department, without directly criticizing the Government of President Chun Doo Hwan, said, ''We deplore torture as a violation of human rights.'' In a statement, it also said: ''We note that the Korean authorities have already begun an investigation. We expect it to be thorough and that they will apply the full force of the law should there be wrongdoings uncovered.'' The 21-year-old student, Park Jung Chul, was in his third year at Seoul National University, where he studied linguistics. He was arrested Wednesday morning and taken to the police anti-Communist bureau, where he was being questioned about purported anti-Government activities, according to the Government account. Government officials said Mr. Park fainted during questioning and died of shock later that day. But Mr. Park's relatives, who were present at his autopsy, told reporters in Seoul that they had seen skin wounds and other evidence of torture. The Seoul police chief announced Friday that the case would be investigated. Human rights campaigners in Seoul and the United States called for an independent investigation. ''When the branch of government that is responsible for the questionable action is the same that undertakes to conduct an investigation, we don't have any confidence that the official results will be credible,'' said Eric Schwartz, program director at Asia Watch, a human rights organization with offices in New York and Washington. The rights groups said Mr. Park's death was the first case in which a suspect had died in police custody during the Chun administration, although in the past prisoners had died in the custody of military security officials. ''We don't know for certain that Mr. Park was tortured,'' Mr. Schwartz said. ''But we have very strong evidence that beating and mistreatment of prisoners and suspects is routine rather than the exception. It's surprising that this hasn't happened before.'' South Korean political dissidents and human rights organizations have asserted that many cases of torture and beatings have occurred at the police anti-Communist bureau, the interrogation center where Mr. Park was taken. Government officials have repeatedly denied assertions of torture but have refused to allow human rights organizations to inspect the building. Reports of torture and beatings of students, labor leaders and political dissidents have been frequent in the last year. In 1986, Amnesty International issued appeals for more than 70 cases in which it said it believed torture had been or might have been used. The Government has denied that it uses torture. ''There have been very few Government investigations into torture,'' said Kathleen Smith, a spokesman for Amnesty International. ''And there have been few instances where investigations that were set up revealed torture. During the last six years, Amnesty International is not aware of any prosecution of officials alleged to have ill-treated political detainees.'' South Korean security forces have arrested hundreds of students and opposition party members since a crackdown started last October. Government officials released many of them, but others have been charged under the National Security Act for actions supportive of North Korea. Dissidents assert that they seek to hold President Chun to his pledge to restore democracy."
