"In an extensive report on Indonesia issued today, a human-rights organization said that some improvement had been made in political and civil rights, but that the country was now stable enough to do better. The organization, Asia Watch, based in Washington, urged the United States to do more to encourage the Jakarta Government to further relax restraints on civil rights and political expression. Thirteen years after Indonesia invaded the former Portuguese colony of East Timor and later annexed it, the report says, ''some of the worst excesses of the occupation forces have abated, but the Timorese people continue to suffer daily violations of fundamental rights,'' with restrictions on freedom of speech, association and travel amid ''a climate of fear.'' In the last year, the report says, more than 100 political prisoners have been released from prison in East Timor, and in recent years ''there have been comparatively few documented cases of disappearances, torture or extrajudicial execution'' common in the period after the Indonesian invasion of December 1975. The Indonesians overthrew a de facto administration of the Revolutionary Front of East Timor, or Fretilin, which had won a civil war in the confusion following rapid Portuguese decolonization. The rebels continue to oppose Indonesian authority. Limited Access to East Timor But such progress merely highlights continuing shortcomings, the report argues, citing severe restrictions on access to East Timor by independent journalists and investigators, a pervasive security apparatus, continuing arrests and detentions on ''arbitrary grounds'' and a failure to account for ''all but a handful of the many thousands thought to have 'disappeared' since 1975'' while in custody. The Indonesian Government has said it is gradually lifting restrictions on travel to East Timor and has allowed some journalists and diplomats guided visits to the island. It also allows the International Committee of the Red Cross to operate there. On Oct. 28, 47 United States Senators and 182 Congressmen signed a letter criticizing Indonesian rule over East Timor and expressing concern over ''a 13-year-old conflict between guerrillas and Indonesian forces, food shortages and human-rights violations.'' On Friday, 379 Indonesian parliamentarians issued a letter in response, denying any abuses of human rights in East Timor and suggesting that the Jakarta Government allow foreigners to visit the island whenever free movement of Indonesians is permitted. The 348-page Asia Watch report, which was written by Diane F. Orentlicher, a consulting lawyer for the organization, also criticizes the prosecution of Muslim dissidents ''on political charges in trials lacking any semblance of fair process.'' The report says that Indonesia's judiciary is not fully independent and has acquiesced in doubtful prosecutions of Government critics on charges of subversion. Physical abuse of detainees ''appears to be common throughout Indonesia,'' the report says, and restrictions continue on the rights of former political prisoners, over 20 years after their involvement in the then-legal Communist Party. The party was blamed for a failed coup in 1965."
