"As Pakistan's new Consultative Assembly began the first public debate of Government policy in four years of military rule, and as President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq withdrew formal press censorship, Amnesty International today issued a 54-page report charging that torture, imprisonment and violation of human rights in this country had increased steadily in the last year. The three events were variously assessed here as evidence that President Zia was either inching toward or backing away from his stated goal of restoring some form of democracy ''as close to Islam as possible.'' For critics of the mili tary regime, most of them associated with the outlawed old political parties, both the Consultative Council andthe lifting of press censorship are regarded as cosmetic measures that will not impinge on General Zia's power.  These critics tend to give weight to the Amnesty International repo rt. Supporters of Mr. Zia are saying that the convening of the Council and the censorship move reflect a relaxation and provide an opportunity to create conditions for the eventual transfer of power to yet unspecified civilian institutions. These people regard the torture charges as overblown and largely based on what they view as suspect testimony of exiles in London. The gulf between the two groups is wide. In its report, the Londonbased human rights organization said that last March 6,000 political prisoners had been arrested. Amnesty International charged that political prisoners, including for the first time women, were being systematically tortured, beaten, forced to remain awake or trussed and hung upside down for long periods. The report said that in the last year three political prisoners died in polic e custody as a result of torture and ill treatment and that two poli tical prisoners had been executed. No Official Government Reply The Government here has not replied to Amnesty International, whose executives delivered the report to the Pakistani Ambassador in London on Nov. 17. However, Khalid Ali, the Director of External Publicity here, said today that the report was highly exaggerated and contained lies. Mr. Ali said that there were presently 62 people in prison or detention who could be considered political prisoners.  Sixteen of these, he said, were political leaders. He added that last March there had been 300 political detainees, and he denied that any were tortured. He said that the trend is toward fewer arrests. Western diplomats put the number of those confined for political activity at about 500. They say people are often held for a few months and then released. Flogging is openly carried out for both criminal and political offenses. Both diplomats and Pakistanis often point out that torture and intimidation have been features of life here since the days of British rule. Western diplomats and Pakistani journalists today described the 288-member Consultative Assembly as further evidence that that old political parties are moribund. They pointed out that more than 120 members of the Assembly had been prominent members of either Mr.  Bhutto's party or the old Moslem League and that they took their seats in the face of demands by the party leaders to ignore the body that was conceived and appointed by President Zia. Undercutting Old Politicians The group, which includes 16 women and members of religious and tribal minorities, is dominated by members of Pakistan's most powerful and richest families, both landowners and industrialists. As one political analyst here said, ''They may never evolve into a real parliament, but they have already further undercut the old politicians.'' As constituted, the group has no power to make policy. It will be able to make recommendations to the military Government and may be able to focus national attention on issues through public questioning of officials. Some critics pointed out that today when Foreign Minister Agha Shahi addressed the Assembly on foreign policy, the subsequent debate was closed to press coverage - as if uncertain of what the delegates might say. Similar criticism was made of the move to scrap censorship. On the one hand, the President declared that as of today newspapers here would no longer have to submit stories to Government censors before publication. On the other, the Government reaffirmed the ban on the coverage of political activity, which, according to some reporters here, merely shifted the burden of responsibility to editors, making them more vulnerable and therefore more timid."
