"To the Editor: In ""China Ready to Try (and Forget) Dissidents"" (news article, Dec. 5), your reporter could find few people familiar with the names of imprisoned Chinese dissidents from an earlier era and uses this as evidence that China is willing to forget them. But the Chinese can't be expected to remember what they never knew. The flow of information in China is controlled by the Government, and few Chinese learn about political detainees and human rights abuses in their country. You mention that Chinese leaders appear ready to begin trials of those involved in the 1989 democracy movement. According to information available to Amnesty International, these include some of China's leading activists for democracy and human rights -- intellectuals like Liu Xiaobo and Ren Wending, student leaders like Wang Dan and Beijing Workers Autonomous Federation leaders, like Han Dongfang. Criminal trials in China are ordinarily secret, swift and severe. Because we usually hear of verdicts and executions only after the fact, any news of impending charges or trials, especially of prominent dissidents, is newsworthy. Also, such trials in China are neither independent nor impartial, and the outcome is determined before the trial begins. Chinese laws offer only limited guarantees for the accused, and even these are often ignored. The accused is never presumed innocent, has no right to call defense witnesses and cannot cross-examine witnesses for the prosecution. Successful appeals, especially in political trials, are rare. Amnesty International is monitoring the cases of more than 700 people who have languished in Chinese prisons and detention centers for more than a year without being charged. Torture during detention is commonplace, especially in cases involving workers and less well-known political activists. Most detainees have had no contact with their families. The whereabouts of others are unknown. Finally, you report of Wang Juntao and Chen Zeming, who are charged with ""spreading counterrevolutionary propaganda"" and ""plotting to overthrow the government,"" that they may receive prison sentences of up to 15 years. These charges carry a minimum penalty of 10 years imprisonment. The maximum penalty is death. TRUDY GOLDEN Brookline, Mass., Dec. 9, 1990 The writer is with the China coordination group of Amnesty International."
