"The core problem facing the international conference on Cambodia just under way in Paris is to define a realistic future role for the Khmer Rouge. When this group of fanatics held absolute power in the late 1970's, it was responsible for the deaths of a million people and the devastation of Cambodian society. It remains the single strongest indigenous military force in the country. Khmer Rouge military power could again prove decisive after Vietnam completes its scheduled withdrawal Sept. 30. The challenge to the Paris conferees is to devise a formula that provides enough incentive for the Khmer Rouge to join a settlement without allowing it to regain power. That was the message of Secretary of State Baker at yesterday's formal opening of the 19-nation conference. The major powers at the conference back different Cambodian groups: China arms and supports the Khmer Rouge. The United States backs the Khmer Rouge's non-Communist allies, especially Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the Soviet Union stands behind the Vietnamese-installed Cambodian regime. But the powers now appear agreed on the need for a political settlement. Left to themselves, Cambodian politicians could barely agree on seating at the peace table. And they now have barely two months left before the Vietnamese withdrawal to establish an interim regime, find ways to share power and integrate four armies, and devise mechanisms to verify Vietnam's departure. What will be still harder to find is a formula for bringing the Khmer Rouge inside without letting it take over the tent. Cambodia's former head of state, Prince Sihanouk, and his non-Communist ally, Son Sann, see the Khmer Rouge as an essential counterweight to Prime Minister Hun Sen, the Vietnam-backed Communist. For his part, Mr. Hun Sen proposes a coalition excluding the Khmer Rouge, but resists internationally monitored elections and won't give the non-Communists the constitutional guarantees they need to protect their role in a multiparty system. The Bush Administration has backed the Prince in his justifiable pressure for those guarantees. Dubiously, it has won from Congress discretionary authority to provide arms to Cambodia's non-Communist resistance. Fortunately, Secretary Baker made clear yesterday that the U.S. could not support any settlement that gave a share of power to the Khmer Rouge. Rudimentary decency should preclude any association with Pol Pot or senior Khmer Rouge leaders suspected of crimes against humanity. And simple prudence argues against giving any Khmer Rouge leader authority for Cambodia's military or security policies. It is up to the outside powers to convince the Khmer Rouge of two things: that its supporters' political rights will be protected -but that its leaders can never again expect to tyrannize Cambodia."
