"An international campaign to have China condemned by the United Nations for human rights violations in connection with its suppression of the democracy movement is expected at a meeting opening on Monday in Geneva. The drive, spearheaded by private human rights organizations around the world and supported by most Western governments, is widely seen as a critical test of the United Nations human rights enforcement machinery as its effectiveness is being questioned. Over the last few weeks United Nations officials here and in Geneva say they have received more than 100 formal complaints about the Beijing Government's actions from rights groups outside the country and from individuals in China. At the Geneva meeting, the petitioners will ask the 26 independent members of a United Nations human rights subcommission to condemn China for human rights abuses. Such a resolution would be sent for approval by the 43 governments represented on the full Human Rights Commission when it holds its annual worldwide review of human rights abuses next spring. The New York-based International League for Human Rights plans to bring two Chinese student leaders who fled the country to Geneva to testify before the subcommission, the league's executive director, Felice Gaer, said. The student leaders, Wuer Kaixi and Chai Ling, will be joined by Yan Jiaqi, a former adviser to the ousted Chinese Communist Party leader, Zhao Ziyang. Other rights groups planning to press the case against China include Amnesty International and the International Commission of Jurists. After the subcommission meeting, Western governments are expected to attack China's rights record at the annual session of the General Assembly, the top United Nations decision-making body, which opens in New York in mid-September. Although the United Nations cannot force governments to respect the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, it can try to press them to do so by focusing attention on abuses through resolutions, reports and investigations. The campaign to condemn China is certain to encounter fierce resistance, diplomats say, with Beijing pressing third-world countries on the subcommission to oppose critical resolutions. Composition of the Panel The panel is made up of experts nominated by their governments. Most of those from the developing world are civil servants or others likely to obey official instructions. Western governments generally appoint judges or private lawyers, who are considered politically independent. China has been highly sensitive to criticism of its internal policies. At the last Human Rights Commission meeting in March, it persuaded third-world members to block criticism of its actions in Tibet. But Western diplomats say China must not be allowed to escape United Nations criticism for its suppression of the democracy movement, even though it is has a permanent seat on the Security Council and is a nuclear superpower. ''The U.N.'s credibility is at stake,'' said Reid Brody of the International Commission of Jurists. At the meeting last March, developing countries agreed to end investigations into the human rights practices of Iraq, Syria, Zaire and Honduras, and they blocked a Western attempt to condemn Iraq for using poison gas in its war against Iran. Among the few countries regularly criticized by the Commission are Israel, South Africa, El Salvador, Chile and Rumania."
