"While world attention has focused on violent conflict in Sri Lanka between the mainly Buddhist Sinhalese majority and largely Hindu Tamil minority, insufficient attention has been paid to the Sri Lanka Government's civil rights record. Yet is it precisely at a time when the Government has been seeking a return to the rule of law and to reduce ethnic conflict, in a country often cited as a model of third-world democratic development, that a demonstration of its respect for rights takes on heightened importance. Much news coverage has focused on violence used by small Tamil extremist separatist groups, which have carried out several attacks in the past. One claimed responsibility for the ambush of 13 soldiers in July that triggered the recent indiscriminate, widespread reprisals against the Tamils and that led to violence that resulted in more than 300 deaths. Such Tamil killings, and those by the Sinhalese, have been widely and rightly condemned. The Government has repeatedly denied that its security forces violate fundamental rights. However, as head of an Amnesty International fact-finding mission in January 1982, I received first-hand evidence that incommunicado detention under the Prevention of Terrorism Act was widespread, and that the army and police regularly tortured political suspects and carried out political killings in June 1981, similar to those recently confirmed by President J. R. Jayawardene. I believe that recent killings by security authorities follow a pattern previously set.  President Jayawardene confirmed on Aug. 7 that armed forces had killed at least 20 innocent Tamils in the north, saying that the army had withheld information from him about these excesses. The Tamils, including an 83-year-old teacher, apparently were slain in retaliation by the army, immediately after the killing of the 13 soldiers. The authorities are understood to have wavied the usual requirement of holding an inquest.  The Government must bear full responsibility for these breaches of the right to life and other violations of human rights, especially in light of the wide powers that in recent years it has given to the security forces, which apparently have interpreted them as a license to act with impunity. The 1979 Prevention of Terrorism Act, for example, allows people to be held incommunicado for up to 18 months without trial, thus creating classical conditions for torture. Most recently, emergency regulation 15A permits the army and police to bury or cremate dead bodies without inquest procedures or a post-mortem. When Amnesty International visited, it learned that prisoners were held incommunicado for long periods and in some cases in solitary confinement for more than eight months. Torture during this period was said to include hanging victims upside down from hooks, beating them with metal bars and driving needles under toenails and fingernails. Amnesty also investigated the death of Tamils apparently shot or beaten to death by security forces in June 1981 after the shooting of two police officers. Two young Tamils rounded up at the time told us they were taken to lonely spots, shot by a police officer and left to die. Although one is now handicapped, both somehow survived. Before being shot, one said, he was told by the officer: ''You people are shooting Sinhalese so we are shooting Tamils.'' It is regrettable that the Government did not institute independent investigation to establish responsibility for these killings and take measures against those responsible. Instead, one police official involved was promoted and emergency legislation was introduced, facilitating further killings.  Clearly, the Government faces serious internal security problems. It has a responsibility to bring to trial those responsible for violent acts. In addition, it has a responsibility under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which Sri Lanka is a party, to make sure that torture and political killings are never used - even in a national emergency.  There is still hope that the Government Lanka will respect the tradition of upholding the rule of law. Finally, unless it upholds its own laws, and international human rights commitments, it is highly unlikely that there can be any real solution to Sri Lanka's problems. Now, with calm apparently restored, the Government could conduct a full review of past events and take steps to protect human rights such as ending incommunicado detention and creating independent machinery to investigate reports of torture and political killings, with published findings and proceedings against those held responsible. Those who care about democracy in Sri Lanka should urge the Government to do so."
