"Human rights campaigners who think that the United Nations can discourage abuses are concerned by China's support for a proposal before the General Assembly to restrict the organization's right to criticize individual governments for violations. The argument, which has gathered support from poorer countries, holds that the United Nations Charter, with its emphasis on safeguarding sovereignty and noninterference in internal affairs, should protect governments against criticism of their human rights record by the United Nations. The resurgence of support for this argument is part of a general stiffening of third world resistance to the efforts the United Nations makes to shame countries into respecting their obligations under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights by publicizing violations at the General Assembly or through its Human Rights Commission in Geneva, these experts say. ''China is seeking to resuscitate an argument that is anachronistic,'' said Michael H. Posner of the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights. ''But it wins support from other violators.'' China was not attacked in this year's rights debate because it is already under investigation by the Human Rights Commission for its crackdown on pro-democracy protests. But China's representative, Li Luye, urged other developing countries to support his contention that the United Nations has no right to criticize individual countries publicly. Citing the guarantees the Charter offers member countries against outside interference, Mr. Li said ''the principle of noninterference in the internal affairs of other countries should also apply to the issue of human rights.'' Mr. Li said: ''Moreover, developing countries often cannot afford the scrupulous regard for individual liberties richer nations urge on them. The primary task facing the countries and peoples just freed from colonialism, foreign aggression and occupation is to guard against subversion and sabotage by both domestic and foreign hostile forces, maintain social stability and protect their population from hunger.'' Western lawyers have never accepted such arguments, pointing out that Articles 55 and 56 of the United Nations Charter call on members ''to take joint and separate action'' to promote ''human rights and freedoms.'' ''China is trying to reverse a general tendency to recognize human rights as a proper subject of international concern,'' said Oscar Schachter, professor of international law and diplomacy at Columbia University. Some feel it is too late to end the practice of naming human rights offenders in United Nations resolutions and mounting formal investigations into abuses. But it was only in the 1970's that the United Nations started accusing countries of human rights violations by name. And at this year's General Assembly the third world scored several victories in its campaign to present such criticism as interference in internal affairs. A resolution introduced by the Netherlands that encouraged governments to promote freedom of assembly and expression was defeated with many delegations saying it interferes illegally in members' own affairs. An American resolution advocating regular free elections was also watered down by third world countries who made it conditional on national laws. And Brazil, which sees foreign criticism of its enviromental record as unjustified, defeated a resolution that would have recognized a '' healthy environment'' as a human right. The biggest third world challenge to the United Nations existing rights enforcement machinery, however, came in a resolution which calls for more developing countries to join the 42-member Human Rights Commission. Such an increase in size, which the West vigorously opposed, could make it increasingly difficult for the Commission to agree on rights criticisms. But faced with a united third world majority, the West accepted a compromise linking the Commission's enlargement with undefined new steps to ''make its work more effective.''"
