".4,0,285.2,2,285.2,0The debate goes on. Are authoritarian regimes as reprehensible as totalitarian regimes, or less reprehensible? Answers that the Government and conservative newspaper columnists give vary from ''less'' to ''hardly reprehensible at all.'' The debate, of course, is of awesome importance to our human rights policy - indeed, to our entire foreign policy. It seems to me that the authoritarians are very much worse. I hold that the ''totalitarians'' - the code word for Communist and semi-Communist countries - are in a different league, are far superior to the authoritarians in the field of human rights. Indeed, they beat the Western democracies on a number of scores, not to mention such half-and-half democracies as Mexico and India. This is not an ideological statement; it is a statistical fact. At its core lies a question: How do we define and delimit human rights? If we think of those rights as being the freedom to come and go, to pray, to speak and to write - and, in the words of the philosopher Karl Jaspers, ''the freedom to go to the devil'' - the authoritarians may come off more favorably. They run their regimes for the rich and the powerful and for an intellectual elite willing to collaborate; they play ball with the international business community and the International Monetary Fund, and, as a rule, don't bother anyone who doesn't make waves, although speaking against them is very unhealthy for a native. The rights they do grant are precisely the rights that our politicians and news-media figures hold most precious: the guarantees to the individual that he or she will be left alone. Unfortunately, under authoritarian regimes ''the people'' - the amorphous, anonymous mass of peasants and little tradesmen and workers -are also left alone, at best. Yes, they can freely emigrate - if they just find the money and another country that will have them. Yes, they can get a fine education and go to fine doctors -if they can afford it. If not, their freedom is but the freedom to go to the devil. And to the devil they go, in great numbers: the two out of five children in Brazil who don't live to be adults; the unemployed of Mexico - 40 percent of the nation - whose lives wind down in the despair of begging, public handouts, unwantedness. It is not necessary to think of the army massacres in El Salvador to find a flouting of human rights in authoritarian countries. The rights that are flouted are: the right to work, to eat, to be clothed and educated and housed, to lead a healthy and useful existence. And those are the rights that are secured to a considerable degree by the totalitarians. The totalitarian - that is, Communist - regimes do not play ball with the financial community and thus their money is wallpaper once it is out of the country. Financial considerations aside, they consider emigration akin to treason: The departure of an educated person is likened to theft of public education. And they see sectarian ideologies and religions as enemies of law and order. Thus, while our intellectuals and economic upper-layer folks imagine that they could be relatively happy living in Rio or Buenos Aires, the thought of Moscow or Havana gives them nightmares, and justly so. What Moscow and Havana would take away is what they hold dear; the rights that Moscow and Havana offer they take for granted and always have. But for 90 percent of humanity, those rights are not to be taken for granted at all, and if the authoritarians run their countries for, say, 5 percent of the populace, the Communists run them for, say, 90 percent of the populace. That is not a difference to be sneezed at. The children of Mexico City who eke out their halfanimal existence by peddling newspapers and chewing gum to passing drivers have many theoretical rights that the well-fed, well-clothed, decently housed and secure children of Havana do not have, but if we look at the happiness of the greatest number, Cuba beats Mexico. A lot of public argument is false per se because supporters of the authoritarians simply want to put a good face on our various alliances. We wouldn't now be voting for Pol Pot if that were not the case. But to those who genuinely want to compare the ''freedom'' of Rio with the ''lack of freedom'' in Havana, I would say: ''Leave the central avenues and walk through the slums.'' I am not arguing that children's shoes outweigh re-education camps. Lucky nations have the shoes without the camps, but they are few. Most authoritarian countries have the camps without the shoes. Yes, the free human spirit is our noblest good, but I do not want to celebrate it where the children go hungry and naked and spurned. I will mourn the million children's corpses in the hovels of Sao Paulo more than the bondage of a Soviet scientist who cannot emigrate. I will speak out against the scientist's bondage, but in so doing I do not want to be joined by those whose prosperity feeds on those dead children, those whose real enemy is not Communism but their own people. --------------------------------------------------------------------- Hans Koning, a novelist, is author of the forthcoming ''The Kleber Flight.''"
