"Few outside events have fired the imagination of South Korea's political dissidents as much as the fall of Ferdinand E. Marcos in the Philippines. It takes little prodding, sometimes none at all, to set opposition politicians to talking hopefully about how the same sort of lightning might strike here. ''You have many dictatorships in Asia,'' says Kim Dae Jung, the most prominent anti-Government figure. ''But only in South Korea and the Philippines do you have people actively seeking democracy. They succeeded in the Philippines, and maybe we will succeed here.'' By the same token, few other external events in recent years have so troubled the Government and governing party of President Chun Doo Hwan. It is not that Mr. Chun, too, risks being swept from power, his lieutenants insist. Rather, they say, it is that their critics may misread the situation and succumb to political daydreaming. ''We worry about overexpectations from the opposition,'' said Hyun Hong Choo, a spokesman for the governing Democratic Justice Party. Nevertheless, the specter of the Philippines will not go away. On Sunday, South Korea's Roman Catholic Primate, Stephen Cardinal Kim Sou Hwan, urged Mr. Chun to change the country's Constitution soon to permit direct presidential elections, as opposition leaders demand. In the process, the Cardinal alluded to the recent turmoil in Manila. Government Called to Account ''Korea is different from the Philippines,'' he said, but he then added that the Government must first provide proof of this by showing South Korea is ''free of corruption, torture, political oppression, rule by a handful of families and violation of human rights.'' In certain respects, political comparisons between South Korea and the Philippines are perhaps inevitable. In the last year, the people of both countries demonstrated at the ballot box that they have a strong taste for democracy. Both populations, however, have endured long autocratic rule. In both countries, international organizations have protested the torture of political prisoners and other human-rights violations. South Korea and the Philippines are also unusually vulnerable to pressure from the United States, which maintains a large military presence in both and has historical links. One result is that almost any head-cracking by the police in Seoul or Manila draws swift attention, along with condemnation, from Americans. ''But that's the end to all the similarities,'' the governing party's Mr. Hyun says. Many political analysts, including Asian and Westerners, agree. Economic Differences For one thing, Mr. Marcos presided over a crumbling economy in severe recession for the last two years. The income gap between the ruling elite and the impoverished majority is great, and the foreign debt of the Philippines is $26 billion. By contrast, South Korea's economy has improved under Mr. Chun, with Government economists forecasting growth of 7.5 percent this year. There is concern about unfair distribution of wealth, but not to the extent as in the Philippines. There is also a severe foreign debt, more serious than Manila's at over $46 billion. But there is no worry here of collapse, and to underline the differences further, Seoul was host to the last annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund. Unlike the inefficient, ill-disciplined Philippine armed forces, the South Korean military is a respected, effective fighting machine that dominates the Government and is likely to continue shaping the country's political future. Moreover, South Korea has not suffered from some of the more glaring excesses of 20 years' rule by one man. Mr. Marcos and his wife, Imelda, funneled millions, perhaps billions, of Government dollars to themselves and favored friends and relatives. In Mr. Chun's five years as President, there also have been instances of nepotism and cronyism. But there is no evidence to suggest anything approaching the pervasive corruption associated with the Marcos family. There are other differences between the two countries that the Government here does not much like to discuss. Opposition leaders like Kim Dae Jung say these differences could lead to the sort of ''explosion'' that was averted in the overthrow of the Marcos Government. Most conspicuously, South Korea has a far more restrictive environment than the Philippines in Mr. Marcos's waning days. The streets of Seoul are filled with soldiers and plainclothesmen who apparently have license to stop anyone they please. South Korean newspapers are far more tightly controlled. Free assembly is little tolerated, and demonstrations often are broken up before they can even begin. In South Korea, where Mr. Chun's troops killed some 200 civilians in his rise to power, it is difficult to imagine tanks turning back in the face of citizen resistance, as they did in Manila. Repeatedly, the Government has maintained that controls are necessary in the face of a constant threat from an implacably hostile North Korea. But Mr. Kim cautioned that this can create a dangerous atmosphere in which dissatisfied South Koreans feel that they have no recourse except violence. ''The worst thing is not dictatorship or corruption,'' he said, ''but the fact that there is no way for our people to peacefully have contact with the ruling party or the Government.''"
