"China has continued to commit gross violations of the human rights of Tibetans during the past year, according to a report issued today by a Washington-based human rights organization. The group, Asia Watch, said, ''Human rights violations there are severe and warrant strong international concern.'' The report also said the Reagan Administration had ignored the situation in Tibet despite recurring reports of arrests and torture of Tibetans. ''China's official silence on the prevalence of human rights problems in Tibet has gone largely unchallenged and uncriticized by the U.S. Administration,'' the report said. Restricted Access Asia Watch was established in 1985 and is associated with two other human rights monitoring groups, Helsinki Watch and Americas Watch. The group based its report on Tibet on a variety of sources, including foreign press accounts, translations of Chinese newspapers and reports of foreign visitors to the region. Still, the chairman of the organization said, it has been difficult to assess the precise dimensions of the situation in Tibet now. ''The Chinese Government has severely restricted access to the territory and, as a result, practices have largely escaped scrutiny,'' said Jack Greenberg, chairman of Asia Watch and professor of law at Columbia University, in written comments accompanying the report. ''Serious abuses of human rights continue and are now largely unchecked by the kind of international attention that accompanied the suppression of the fall protests,'' the report continued, in a reference to three violent protests by Tibetan Buddhist monks that were crushed by the Chinese authorities in October 1987. China says it has exercised sovereignty over Tibet since the 13th century. Many Tibetans, however, dispute this assertion and believe that they should be accorded independence under the leadership of the Dalai Lama, the spiritual leader of Tibet who is living in exile in India. All foreign countries formally recognize China's claim to the region. Details of March Rioting The Asia Watch report describes in some detail the events surrounding a riot that occurred on March 5, the final day of the annual Great Prayer Festival, during which Chinese police were said to have fired on the Tibetan protesters. According to Asia Watch, as many as 10,000 Tibetans were involved in the confrontation with the police that day. ''Based on the reports we have received, Asia Watch is concerned that the authorities attempted to deny to Tibetans the right of freedom of assembly and expression during the Great Prayer Festival,'' the report said. ''We believe that the authorities used excessive force in quelling the disturbances and we are extremely concerned by reports of beatings and shootings of demonstrators.'' Asia Watch also accused the Chinese of torturing Tibetan prisoners, particularly during the period surrounding the March 5 demonstraton. ''There is little doubt now,'' the report said, ''that torture is often part of the routine in political arrests and incarceration in Tibet, and that the use of cattle prods is common in such instances.'' Since that incident, Asia Watch said, tight control has been exercised over Lhasa, the region's capital. Indeed, foreign journalists have been barred from Tibet and the only tourists permitted to visit have been confined to closely supervised tour groups and mountaineering expeditions. No 'Obvious Military Presence' A foreigner who visited Tibet last week said today that armed police were not roaming Lhasa in force during his trip, unlike reports of the situation in the capital earlier this year. ''The Chinese appear to have the situation under control without any obvious military presence,'' said the foreigner, who asked that his name not be published. ''There are no longer armed lookouts on top of buildings and there weren't any sirens going on the streets,'' he said. ''There were a lot of what I'd say were plainsclothes cops, particularly near the Jokhang.'' The Jokhang Temple, the holiest site of Tibetan Buddhism, is in the center of Lhasa and was the site of all demonstrations against Chinese rule during the past year."
