"This Christmas we are getting, as usual, the standard fare of the season: religious services on Christmas Eve, including midnight Mass from St. Patrick's Cathedral (Channel 11) and, also at midnight, a Mass from St. Peter's in Rome (Channel 4). Series from ''Thirtysomething'' to ''China Beach'' have worked the holiday into their scripts. And, of course, there are the television classics - ''Rudolph, the Red-Nosed Reindeer'' and a slew of other low-cost reruns. Over on the Home Box Office cable network on Sunday evening at 9:30, there is a three-hour music special that was not produced with Christmas in mind, but its sentiments dovetail spendidly with the season. The HBO World Stage division is presenting ''The Human Rights Now Tour,'' culled from tapes from a six-week global tour intended to promote the work and goals of Amnesty International. In the special, Bruce Springsteen puts it this way, ''Amnesty International makes the world a little less oppressive, a less brutal place to live in.'' The organization was established in 1961 in support of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted by the United Nations in 1948. The declaration outlines the rights and fundamental freedoms that should be the heritage of all people. Amnesty International seeks to be a nonideological monitor, keeping watch on governments using torture and military repression. Members are urged to send letters to governmental officials regarding political prisoners, a tactic that is said to result in the release of at least 1,000 people a year. The concert tour, which began in September, was directed by Bill Graham, whose association with rock goes back to his legendary Fillmore theaters in the 1960's. In addition to Mr. Springsteen, the core lineup includes Sting, Tracy Chapman, Peter Gabriel and Youssou N'Dour. The tour began at Wembley Stadium in London and ended in Argentina. In between, the musicians visited, among other places, Budapest, Paris, Philadelphia and Toronto, as well as Brazil, Greece, India, Japan, Spain and Zimbabwe. At different points, they were joined by other performers who happened to be in the area. The Philadelphia concert, for instance, included Joan Baez and Bono of U2. Part of the television special, which was directed by Larry Jordan and produced by Michael Pillot and John Diaz, takes the form of a travelogue, mixing scenes of different places with comments at press conferences from the performers about why they are supporting Amnesty International. ''It is an opportunity to put your ideals into service,'' Mr. Gabriel says. Ms. Chapman talks about ''six weeks of our time and not getting paid.'' But the performers retained the rights to the three-hour tape. HBO may show it only two times, and the broadcast on Sunday is the second. The program is arranged into extended individual sets for each stars. Mr. N'Dour is first, providing everything from the irresistible percussions of his native Senegal to the equivalent of a go-go dancer. Coming on last, and clearly wielding the most influence with the enormous crowds, is Mr. Springsteen, who, HBO says, is appearing for the first time in a television concert with his E Street Band. Mr. Springsteen is characteristically blunt, speaking to his audience about the ''systematic apartheid of South Africa and the economic apartheid of my own country.'' There is some question as to whether his foreign audiences understand what he's talking about. One thing is certain: his music speaks for itself. There is dancing in the aisles. In the special, Sting makes an appeal, as he did at 15 press conferences throughout the tour, for Sita Ram Maskey, a Nepalese teacher imprisoned for protesting the sale of milk powder contaminated by the Chernobyl disaster in the Soviet Union. Held without charge or trial since May 1987, he was set free at the end of October. The Human Rights Now Tour ends with the Amnesty International message: Don't give up the fight."
