"To the Editor: In an Oct. 14 news article, ''Indonesia Defends Role in East Timor,'' Foreign Minister Kusumaatmadja is cited as saying that reports of human-rights abuses against residents of East Timor are ''untrue.'' Amnesty International has followed the human-rights situation in East Timor since the territory was invaded by Indonesian forces in December 1975, and we find the Foreign Minister's comment disturbing. It has been evident to Amnesty International in investigating the situation in East Timor that human-rights violations occur there within the context of an occupation of extraordinary brutality in which a whole range of fundamental human rights have been denied the population. We believe that the population of East Timor has been systematically denied the rights to freedom of expression, association, assembly and movement. Persons exercising their right to petition the government for redress of grievances have been arbitrarily detained. Movement and communication within and beyond East Timor has been tightly controlled. We are also disturbed by the Indonesians' failure to investigate a number of cases of human-rights violations in East Timor.  One case involved ''Operation Fence of Legs.'' Undertaken by Indonesian forces from July to September of 1981 with the aim of eliminating Fretilin forces (the movement for an independent East Timor which resisted the Indonesian invasion), its strategy was to deploy tens of thousands of Timorese to form human fences that converged on and flushed out remaining Fretilin forces. Reports indicated that civilians enlisted for this operation were required to advance in front of Indonesian forces and were unarmed or armed only with primitive weapons. While it is not possible to gauge the number killed in the operation, it is clear that many did not return to their homes. We also received extensive reports of torture of detainees during interrogation. Forms of torture described in those accounts include burning with red-hot irons and cigarettes, electric shocks to the genitals and other parts of the body, extraction of finger and toe nails with pliers and slashing with knives. We have raised these concerns with the Indonesian Government. So far there has been no response. LARRY COX, Deputy Director, Communications Amnesty International, New York, Oct. 22, 1982"
