"A London-based human rights organization and members of a South Korean opposition group accused South Korean Government officials last week of torturing political prisoners to obtain false confessions of espionage and antistate activities, crimes that carry the death penalty. Relatives of some of the prisoners made similar assertions in a tape recording that was brought out of South Korea last week by a member of the opposition group, the National Youth Alliance for Democracy. The State Department spokesman, Bernard Kalb, said Friday that the Reagan Administration was aware of ''credible reports'' that three Korean journalists and a youth activist had been subjected to torture by Korean security officials. Calling the incidents ''deplorable,'' Mr. Kalb said, ''We have made known to the Korean Government our concern.'' A spokesman at the South Korean Embassy in Washington, Park Johng Seh, said he could not comment on the allegations of torture. #23 Reported Detained Amnesty International, the human rights organization, said in a statement that 23 South Koreans were detained in September for purportedly instigating protests and other activities against the Government. Since the arrests, the group said it had received ''frequent reports that political suspects are ill-treated after their arrest to force them to sign 'confessions' that are used in court to secure their conviction, although both torture and the use of statements obtained under duress as evidence in court are prohibited by the 1980 Constitution.'' Sim Ki Sop, a member of the Youth Alliance who recently returned to the United States from South Korea, said he visited prisoners' relatives at the National Council of Churches' office in Seoul, where the allegations of torture were recorded. Mr. Sim said that lawyers for some of the prisoners had asked that the cases be brought to trial while the torture wounds were still visible. He said the defendants were arrested under the National Security Act, but that most of them had not been publicly charged with a crime. According to a transcript of the tape recording, In Jae Keun, the wife of one of the prisoners, said she saw her husband at the prosecutor's office in Seoul on Sept. 26. The husband, Kim Keun Tae, was being helped by prison guards because he was having difficulty walking, Mrs. In said. She said her husband told her he was beaten, tied up, given electric shocks and forced to swallow water laced with red peppers and salt. Wife Says Confession Was Forced Mr. Kim, 38 years old, was arrested Sept. 4 by the Police Anti-Communist Bureau and was forced to sign a statement saying he was an agent for North Korea's President, Kim Il Sung, according to Mr. Sim. Mr. Kim is a founder and former chairman of the National Youth Alliance for Democracy, which has been critical of President Chun Doo Hwan. Other prisoners who were reportedly tortured include Ho In Hoe, a 23-year-old student activist; Ahn Sang Gun, 35, a former resident of Frankfurt, where he edited a Korean-language newspaper; Lee Chin Suk, 35, an assistant professor at Taegu University and several students who attended universities in the United States. ----Dissident Held by South Korea SEOUL, South Korea, Oct. 19 (Reuters) - The police today confined a leading opposition politician, Kim Dae Jung, to his home to prevent him from attending a news conference where colleagues charged that South Korean dissidents had been tortured, his aides said. They said more than 100 police officers were posted outside Mr. Kim's house. A police official had told Mr. Kim, 59 years old, that the action was to stop him from breaking the law."
