"Policemen arrested more than 1,000 people in Seoul tonight in street protests against police torture and other reported human-rights abuses. A police spokesman said 1,170 people were detained during running battles with riot policemen who used tear gas in various parts of the city. The police said 114 might face further charges. Witnesses said thousands of policemen, who ringed the city center, blocked demonstrators from staging a rally marking the anniversary of a 1980 civil uprising in Kwangju. Official counts say 193 died in the uprising. The main protest today was planned for Pagoda Park, a site commemorating the birth of Korea's anti-colonial struggle against Japan in 1919. With thousands of policemen sealing off the park, groups of students fanned out in the area, shouting slogans against President Chun Doo Hwan and against what they say was a cover-up of the torture death of a student activist in January, according to witnesses. The protests were sparked by Mr. Chun's decision last month to postpone talks on election changes and by news that three more police officers had been arrested on charges of involvement in the death of the student, Park Chong Chol, while under interrogation. Opposition politicians and dissidents say the latest arrests prove the Government has been concealing information about Mr. Park's death. The violence today came hours after Mr. Chun ordered a new investigation into the killing of the student. ''If any fact about this incident has been distorted or concealed, this can never be tolerated as it would greately undermine public confidence in the police,'' a presidential spokesman quoted Mr. Chun as saying. Two members of an anti-Communist police squad took responsibility for the death of Mr. Park. They said he died when his throat was crushed against the rim of a bathtub during attempts to make him reveal the whereabouts of another student activist. In January, the Interior Minister and the national police chief were dismissed as a result of the death, which came as the Government stepped up its campaign against opponents branded as sympathizers of North Korea. Analysts say the opposition is expected to use the issue in its drive for democratic changes. A statement signed by more than 100 leaders of human-rights and dissident groups urged the Cabinet today to resign over the reported cover-up. It said the groups were planning a rally demanding an end to torture on June 10. On that day, the governing Democratic Justice Party will hold a convention to choose a candidate to succeed Mr. Chun, who is to step down in February."
