"Brig. Gen. Alfredo S. Olano, in jeans and short-sleeved shirt, sat in the lobby bar of the Cuison Hotel drinking Johnny Walker Black Label and soda and holding a microphone that he gladly accepted from a young female singer. ''Autumn Leaves,'' he said to the band before easing into the ballad with exaggerated feeling. His tablemates, some of them fellow officers, applauded enthusiastically as he finished crooning his first tune and slipped into ''Blue Moon.'' ''I am notorious, you know,'' the general joked. ''Everybody thinks I'm Idi Amin.'' The short, middle-aged general is commander of Region 11, an area in Eastern Mindanao where farmers have been involuntarily relocated, an action that has provoked outrage among lawyers, clerics, and human-rights activists. General Takes Responsibility But the general seems willing to take the responsibility. ''I am the regional commander,'' he declared.  To stem increases in the activity of the insurgent New People's Army, the military, according to General Olano, felt it necessary to move farmers living in ''sensitive areas'' into strategic settlements or hamlets to protect them from the Communist rebels and to keep them out of the fighting. There are about 100,000 people living in at least 35 such strategic settlements in Mindanao. The action, started here in the late 1970's, is similar to policies used in Malaya in the 1950's and in South Vietnam in the 1960's. ''The idea of forcing people from their farms is a violation of what we all consider a human right,'' said Dionisio C. de la Serna, a member of the newly organized human rights commission of the Integrated Bar Association of the Philippines, which is expected to issue a report soon denouncing the policy. 'Going All the Way' ''We are going all the way with his,'' said Mr. de la Serna. ''That means not only dismantling the hamlets,'' he said. ''We are thinking that the people should be adequately compensated.'' The treatment of the farmers in Mindanao has increased controversy over human rights in the Philippines. Since the lifting of martial law in January 1981, President Ferdinand E. Marcos has worked to give the impression that basic freedoms have been reinstated. But reports of military abuses, including the detention and torture of suspected subversives, have undercut Mr. Marcos's assertions of progress. And the relocation issue, which has attracted the attention of Amnesty International and the American Embassy in Manila, has further embarrassed the military. The Government says that there are more than 2,500 guerrillas of the New Peoples Army, the military wing of the outlawed Communist Party of the Philippines. To eliminate the dissidents, the Government appears to have greatly increased garrisons, patrols, arrests and, according to critics, abuses of personal and property rights. Around Davao, there is much talk of the ''lost command'' a mysterious paramilitary unit that has been accused of extreme brutality. The Government denies such a group exists. The relocation situation has led many Filipinos, ordinarily hesitant to talk about abuses by the military, to speak up. In testimony collected by church workers, dozens of farmers told of beatings and torture. Remigio Jainar, a farmer, said he was clubbed when he refused to say that he was an officer in the New People's Army. Aurelio Canete, also a farmer, said he was was stabbed in the right arm for refusing to confess. Villager Reports Abuse Arguilino Maghanoy said he was picked up in San Vicente in northern Davao province and accused of taking part in rebel ambushes of military vehicles. During his interrogation soldiers took turns stamping on his stomach, he said. At night, his hands were tied behind his back with a rope attached to the ceiling. Eventually he signed a confession. The Government says that thousands of insurgents have surrendered, though many of these are suspects. In one case, 7,000 residents of the farming community of Laac in the mountains of Davao Province obeyed requests by army officers to pledge allegiance to the Philippines. When they obliged, this oath-taking was interpreted as a wholesale surrender ceremony and national newspapers carried reports of it as a mass surrender. Laac is now the largest strategic settlement in Mindanao. Since December, more than 3,500 people have been settled at a spot along a rutted, muddy road. From 5 o'clock in the morning to 5 in the afternoon, the farmers are allowed to return to their small farms.  Because some farms are distant from Laac, many have been abandoned, leaving the farmers without work or food. Huddled in temporary shanties, lacking medicine, water or sanitation, they suffer from malnutrition and disease. ''They had to leave everything,'' said Sister Thelma Pena, one of the nuns of the diocese of Tagum. ''Everything they have worked for is now lost.'' Development Policy for Island Most of the farmers in the forested areas of northern Davao are squatters who do not own the land they farm. Many of the nowdisplaced farmers suspect that the relocation policy is connected to the Government's ambitious development plan for Mindanao. The program calls for large-scale forestry, palm oil production and perhaps mining. Several farmers said they were told by Col. Alejandro Cruz that their farms were to be planted in rubber trees and that they would be given land elsewhere. Colonel Cruz denies having told farmers that. Nevertheless, farmers now assume that their claims are lost forever and that the land will be developed by multinational companies. Caught between the Government and the New People's Army, the farmers wonder from whom they have more to fear. The rebels are sometimes referred to as ''nice people.'' And the affect of the relocation program may be to make them seem even more attractive.  ''They are more afraid of the military than the New People's Army,'' said a translator for a young mother in the hamlet of Asuncion on the road to Laac. ''She is not N.P.A., but she likes the military less,'' he said. ''It is a tremendous mistake to treat these people like this,''said Laurente C. Ilagan, a Davao City lawyer who heads a Mindanao humanrights group. ''They will fight back.'' Sitting with friends in a Davao bar, General Olano is unimpressed with the arguments against the policy and seems genuinely surprised by the criticism it provoked. He insists that the program was sensible and voluntary. And yet, with embarrassed Government superiors disassociating themselves from relocation and saying that the whole program was unauthorized, General Olano sometimes sounds like a man whose position is in jeopardy. He speculated about a transfer, about an early retirement. Then, with colleages applauding, he took the microphone to sing ''My Way.''"
