"To the Editor: The South Korean information director claims in his Dec. 10 letter that Korea is ''one of the few nations which has made measurable progress toward human rights. '' he last seven months have seen massive South Korean violation of the International Declaration of Human Rights, even the Governmentowned Korea Herald citing on Dec. 9 ''the unsatisfactory state of human rights here.'' Countless South Koreans far from Kwangju were arbitrarily arrested, in violation of Article 9, after the May uprising in that city. Accusations of torture, contravening Article 5, became endemic. At least 175 civilians have, according to Amnesty International, been tried in secret by military tribunals, in violation of Article 10. Defendants have usually been unable to appoint defense lawyers of their own choosing; Government-appointed lawyers attend, without confidential consultation, to multiple defendants without materials other than those provided by the prosecution. Such methods contravene Articles 8, 10 and 11. The new Political Purification Law is from beginning to end retroactive, in violation of Article 11(2), affecting hundreds who are purged from political life without due court process or precise, announced standards. No criticism of President Chun or his administration is tolerated, contrary to Article 19. The right of free assembly is forbidden, which violates Article 20; the elected Assembly had been closed and its functions usurped by a completely appointed body, in violation of Article 21. Criticism of policies throughout Korea is far more effectively silenced than it was over 500 years ago and during 90 percent of the Yi dynasty. Far from ''measurable progress,'' I have, in 33 years' experience with Korean affairs, never known a year of more precipitate decline in human rights in South Korea. Indeed, this ''consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally accepted human rights'' makes South Korea ineligible for U.S. aid under the amendment to the 1976 Foreign Assistance Act as well as under ''the existence and growth of democratic institutions within the Republic'' standard laid down by the Secretary of State on April 7, 1950.  GREGORY HENDERSON West Medford, Mass., Dec. 12, 1980 The writer served for 16 years as an expert on Korea in the State Department."
