"The Philippines may not be a bastion of liberty, but Filipinos shouldn't be punished further by denying them grand opera, says Sarah Caldwell, the artistic director of the Opera Company of Boston. Human rights activists had criticized Miss Caldwell's decision to help estabish an opera company in Manila under an agreement with the Philippines' First Lady, Imelda R. Marcos. Amnesty International has accused the regime of President Ferdinand E. Marcos of widespread human rights abuses. At a news conference last week, Miss Caldwell said that if artists denied their talents to every country accused of such violations, ''you would not be having much music in this world.'' Son of Casanova Giovanni Vigliotti was literally crazy about marriage, he said last week in an unsuccessful attempt to plead insanity at his bigamy trial in Phoenix, Ariz. His lawyer conceded Mr. Vigliotti had married 100 or more women in the last 20 years, but said he had done it to give them ''a chance to withdraw from the humdrum of life'' and ''join in his fantasy.'' The prosecution said the courtly 53-year-old had done it to swindle them, particularly in the case of Patricia A. Gardiner, who married him after an eight-day courtship in 1981. She said he convinced her to sell her house and then vanished with the proceeds - $36,500 - two weeks later. Repaid for a Raid While Alan and Margaret McSurely were working to protect the rights of others 15 years ago, their own were violated, a Federal jury decided last week. In a suit filed in 1969, when Mrs. McSurely worked for two civil rights organizations that were under investigation, the couple claimed their rights were violated when a local prosecutor ordered their home raided and seized personal documents that were later shared with a Senate panel headed by the late John McClellan. Mrs. McSurely said she was ''overwhelmed'' when the jury set damages at $1.6 million. Most of it is to be paid by the former prosecutor, who is now a millionaire. Art for Crime's Sake One of the best known figures in the art world was sentenced for some creative bookkeeping last week. Frank Lloyd, the owner of Marlboro Galleries could have gotten four years in prison on charges that he tampered with his firm's records of prices paid for paintings by Mark Rothko, the Abstract Expressionist. Instead, the 71-year-old dealer is to set up a scholarship fund and art-appreciation programs for New York City high school students. The criminal case grew out of an 11-year-old civil suit by Rothko's heirs, who charged that Mr.  Lloyd paid too little for some Rothko works and took too high a commission on others. Trucks Must Detour Gerald F. McCall came south to sell militaarily useful machinery to the East while pretending to deal with the West, Federal officials said last week. The Canadian businessman's next trip may be up the river. Mr. McCall and two American associates, Stephen G. Carter of Chicago and Paul Sakwa, a former employee of the Central Intelligence Agency, were indicted for plotting to sell $5 million worth of potentially strategic truck-building machinery to the Soviet Union.  Customs Service officials said the trio tried to deliver the goods by shipping them first to France."
