"On the whole, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams said last week, Vietnam may be ''the worse country to live in'' for people who value human rights. Some 60,000 Vietnamese are political prisoners, according to the Administration's annual survey of what countries around the world have been doing to the lives and liberties of their citizens. The report presented by Mr. Abrams was harsh on Communist countries, although it didn't completely spare regimes friendlier to Washington. The Soviet Union was accused of stepping up ''repression of dissent,'' notably by committing dissidents to cruel and degrading psychiatric treatment with painful drugs. Jumping before they could be pushed, the Russians last week withdrew from the World Psychiatric Association where British and American psychiatrists were discussing suspension or expulsion proceedings against them (Details, page 18). Rights violations also reportedly increased last year in Czechoslovakia, Iran, Lebanon and Nicaragua. Brazil, Uruguay and El Salvador were among the countries said to be making progress. Disputing some of the upbeat conclusions, Michael Posner, representing private rights groups accused the report of showing biases in countries such as El Salvador, Turkey, Zaire and Yugoslavia ''where the Administration has a strong political stake.'' ''With friendly countries,'' the official report said, ''we prefer to use diplomacy, not public pronouncements.'' However, it cited examples of torture, brutality or violence in such friendlies as Pakistan and the Philippines. And Israel was criticized for expanding Jewish settlements in occupied Arab territories, for ''roughing up'' Arabs in the West Bank and Gaza, and imprisoning Arabs for months without formal charges or trial. The situation in South Africa went ''up and down,'' Mr. Abrams said. While acknowledging Pretoria's proposals for limited political representation for nonwhites, the report cited a ''vicious cycle of violence'' -stepped-up South African attacks on neighboring countries in reprisal for damaging raids by African National Congress guerrillas."
