"A United Nations panel today placed China on a list of countries accused of seriously violating their citizens' human rights. The panel, a subcommission of the United Nations Human Rights Commission, voted 15 to 9, by secret ballot, to have the full commission examine charges that China brutally suppressed the student pro-democracy movement in violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It also appealed for clemency for those arrested in connection with the student demonstrations that were put down in June. The 26-member subcommission is preparing a list of countries that it considers guilty of human rights offenses. The full commission will consider the charges at its annual meeting next March. Both bodies can do no more than exert moral pressure on accused governments to mend their ways by investigating the charges against them and publishing their findings. Other countries accused of human rights abuses by the subcommission today included Iran, Indonesia, Guatemala, El Salvador, South Africa and Israel. A First for a Big Power But experts said the condemnation of China was particularly significant. It was the first time that a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council has been censured for its human rights performance in a United Nations forum. It was also the first time that a United Nations body assigned to enforce respect for human rights has passed judgment on the Chinese Government's suppression of the democracy movement this year. On Wednesday, Amnesty International, the human rights watchdog, said it had evidence that China had decided to execute many leaders of the pro-democracy movement in secret and had announced only a few of the death sentences that were passed. The document approved by the subcommission, which is composed of nominally independent experts appointed by their governments, said the panel was ''concerned about the events which took place recently in China and their consequences in the field of human rights.'' It asked the United Nations Secretary General to transmit information provided by China and ''other reliable sources'' to the full commission and appealed for clemency toward those ''deprived of their liberty.'' China's expert on the subcommission, Tian Jin, angrily rejected the resolution, saying his Government was acting within its sovereign rights in ''suppressing a rebellion.'' He accused Western countries of trying to ''blacken China's name.'' He also warned that if the resolution was passed, Western countries would then ''attack'' other developing countries. ''The consequences will not be limited to China and this merits attention everywhere,'' he said. Third World Seeks More Seats Developing countries are seeking to increase the size of the Human Rights Commission to 53 from 43 members, awarding all the additional seats to the third world. The developing countries argue that they are underrepresented on the commission. But Western governments contend that the effort is intended to make it harder for the commission to censure third-world governments for human rights abuses. The Human Rights Subcommission decided to hold secret ballots on all resolutions relating to abuses today at the suggestion of the French expert, Louis Joinet, who said this would allow members to vote according to conscience, free from outside pressure. Only the representatives of Cuba, India, the Soviet Union, Rumania, Somalia and China voted against a secret ballot. Two members were absent."
