"A human rights group has asserted in a report on Indochinese refugees that United States immigration and screening procedures are unfair. It also criticized Thailand, along with Malaysia and Hong Kong, for trying to shift the burden of asylum elsewhere through harsh policies toward refugees. The group, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, based in New York, said in the report this week that American screening of Indochinese refugees in camps in Thailand ''appears arbitrary and capricious.'' It said refugee apllicants are neither represented by counsel nor told why they might be denied legal refugee status. Rights of appeal are limited, the report said, and all interviews and files are regarded as confidential. The report also said that there are not enough Immigration and Naturalization Service interviewers based in Bangkok, and that those who are here have almost no training and little background in Southeast Asia. The result, the report asserted, is a ''lack of consistency and reliability'' in applying current guidelines, which are themselves ''obsolete,'' in part because they are based on 1983 analyses. Issue of Khmer Rouge Applicants The committee calls for the re-interviewing of more than 10,000 Cambodians who have been denied refugee status by the United States on the ground that they took part in persecution by the Khmer Rouge, who ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1979. The report, titled ''Refuge Denied,'' said there is ''substantial controversy'' about those cases. The Lawyers Committee asked the Thai authorities to provide better protection for the 380,000 Indochinese refugees living in camps here, and recommended that Thai law be applied to the camps instead of leaving discipline to Cambodian administrators. It also said that the Thai policy encouraging the turning back of Vietnamese refugee boats was ''a serious violation of human rights.'' As a result of the policy, refugees have drowned and have been put at the mercy of pirates, the report said. The Thai Government has withdrawn the policy, the report acknowledged, but occasional ''pushbacks'' of refugee boats are still reported. Thai officials say their policy is to discourage boat people, but not to harm them. The officials criticize Western countries where refugees have settled, saying those nations have lost interest in refugees while the flow of new ones continues to countries like Thailand. A copy of the report may be obtained for $10 from the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, at 330 Seventh Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001. U.S. Procedures Defended WASHINGTON, Jan. 11 (Special to The New York Times) - Asked about the report, the chief of staff of the Immigration and Naturalization Service, Ruth Anne Myers, defended the immigration procedures. ''In all refugee processes, the applicant is interviewed as an individual,'' she said. ''They are given every opportunity to establish that they are a refugee under U.S. law and entitled to come to the U.S. as a refugee. Each individiual is reviewed on a case-by-case basis.''"
