"To the Editor: While the familiar team of Richard M. Nixon and Henry A. Kissinger plays bad cop-good cop for President Bush in China (news stories, Nov. 7 and 9), arrests and executions of participants in the pro-democracy movement continue, and exiled writers and scholars struggle for financial and moral support - with sources of both dwindling in the face of the Bush Administration's drive to mend fences. It is misleading to speak of the crackdown, as Mr. Nixon does, in the past tense (''the crackdown was excessive . . . The events of April through June damaged the respect'' for China's leaders). International PEN, the association of writers, is working on behalf of 41 writers known to have been arrested since June 4, as well as 13 others imprisoned in other crackdowns on dissent - some since 1979. In an October update, Asia Watch reports the number of officially confirmed arrests as 6,000, and unofficial estimates range as high as 30,000. Trials and executions of workers have been going on since early June, and students are now among those facing trial. Reports from Amnesty International and news items in The Guardian suggest that the torture of detainees is widely practiced. And, though neither Mr. Kissinger nor Mr. Nixon thought it appropriate to mention, the brutal repression of pro-independence advocates in Tibet also continues under the direction of the same Chinese officials with whom President Bush's envoys dined. It is certainly true that the United States and China ''have an interest in stability and peace''; however, neither seems willing to acknowledge that stability requires a government whose legitimacy is widely recognized by the governed and that peace is impossible where gross and flagrant violations of human rights are allowed with impunity. An American policy that truly reflects our historic democratic values should not be quick to mend fences that deprive a billion people of their freedom and dignity. ANDREA GAMBINO   New York, Nov. 13, 1989 The writer is program coordinator of PEN's freedom-to-write committee."
