"Pope John Paul II wound up a long trek across Indonesia today, telling Roman Catholic bishops to speak out against human rights abuses but trying to reassure the Government that Catholics present no threat. The Pope's message was a mosaic of appeals and cautions intended to touch on Indonesia's more pressing social problems but also avoid offending his hosts in the world's most populous Muslim country, where Catholics make up only 3 percent of the population. Throughout his five days here, he has taken an oblique approach to dominant issues like economic justice and individual liberty, or their absence. This pattern held even when he talked about the obstacles that Catholic priests say they face in building churches and retaining foreign missions. The only exception was a trip on Thursday to the province of East Timor, where the Pope deplored wholesale killings by Government troops after Indonesia forcibly annexed the territory in 1976. As he finished celebrating an outdoor Mass there, protesters supporting independence for East Timor clashed with security guards as the Pope watched. Today, the chief Vatican spokesman, Joaquin Navarro-Valls, said John Paul had made no mention of the violence. 'No Obstacles in His Way' Mr. Navarro also insisted that the Pope had not tailored his speeches because of possible Indonesian Government objections. ''There were no obstacles placed in his way,'' he said. ''You were speaking with absolute freedom.'' Nevertheless, there was detectable caution once again tonight as John Paul told a gathering of bishops that they should ''bear witness wherever the dignity and rights of persons are threatened, or when justice or charity demand it.'' Earlier in the day, at a Mass in Sumatra, he invoked a New Testament admonition to ''remember those who are in prison as though you are in prison with them.'' On neither occasion did he clearly state, as international monitors do, that human-rights violations, including the reported torture of political prisoners, remain a problem in Indonesia. Moreover, the Pope balanced his appeal for Catholic outspokenness with a reassurance that Catholics sought to live in harmony with the Muslim majority and other religions. ''Religious diversity within the unity of Indonesia ought not to be feared,'' he said. In similarly veiled fashion, the Pope spoke out against birth control in a country where the Government actively encourages small families. There are ''contemporary social influences,'' the Pope said, that ''bring about an obscuring of fundamental principles regarding family life and the responsibile transmission of life.''"
