"From students to businessmen to politicians, the people in this nation are turning angrily, sometimes violently, against the former President, Chun Doo Hwan. Less than a year after he left office, Mr. Chun, who ruled as an aloof and widely feared autocrat, remains the central issue in Korean domestic politics. No longer can Mr. Chun shape his country's fate; the nation instead is wrestling with his. Students across South Korea have been demonstrating to call for Mr. Chun's arrest on charges of corruption and human-rights violations. For the first time since widespread protests forced Mr. Chun to agree to democratic changes in June 1987, the students have drawn broad public support, culminating in a nationwide demonstration Saturday in which crowds cheered students as they clashed with riot policemen. Seoul was quiet today, and families strolled in the autumn sunshine down clean streets that on Saturday were littered with broken glass and rocks. Name That Provokes Passions The protest, according to Western diplomats and Korean commentators, poses no immediate threat to the Government of President Roh Tae Woo, a longtime political associate and army colleague of Mr. Chun. But public indignation is mounting over new accounts of corruption and brutality in Mr. Chun's tenure, and Mr. Chun's name still evokes passions, even among well-dressed businessmen who deplore student violence but support their cause. ''All the good work he has done in the past had dissolved into air,'' said Kim Duk Soo, a 50-year-old businessman whose tolerance of Mr. Chun turned to disgust as he watched parliamentary investigations into accusations of corruption, broadcast live for the first time on Korean television. ''Now I feel he went too far - the only thing left to him is to apologize to the people.'' Parliamentary investigations and aggressive reporting by a newly unfettered press have made public new accusations of corruption and brutality involving Mr. Chun's relatives or associates. Witnesses have testified about being forced to give millions of dollars in donations to the Ilhae Foundation, which critics assert was to serve as a power base for Mr. Chun after he left office. Investigators are looking into accusations that Mr. Chun's wife, Lee Soon Ja, embezzled money from an education foundation she headed, and that his elder brother may have used his influence to award to his relatives a profitable concession of a Seoul wholesale fish market. Mr. Chun's younger brother is in jail for embezzlement and his property is being seized to pay his fine. Labor Camp Deaths Made Public South Koreans have heard for the first time how at least 54 people died in army-run labor camps set up by Mr. Chun after he seized power in 1980, and how military security agents physically abused the heads of Korean newspapers and television stations to force them to give up their companies and make it easier for the Government to control news. Indeed, the nation is looking into a dark past, and that could be politically explosive because Mr. Roh's Government contains many holdovers from Mr. Chun who may oppose a complete unveiling of the past. And Mr. Roh risks being criticized as a prime mover of a legacy he now repudiates. Yet students and many other Koreans demand an accounting because they believe that past failures to punish abusers opened the way to military coups and authoritarian rule. ''In Korean political history, values have been up in the air,'' said K. J. Kim, a 36-year-old trading-company executive. ''I hope this will be a turning point to establish the correct values by clarifying what is right and wrong.'' Koreans Split on Chun's Fate Most Koreans agree on their feelings about Mr. Chun but split on what his fate should be. Chang Yong Hee, a 49-year-old owner of a beverage company, wants him to apologize, return any money he accumulated illegally, and leave Korea. A well-dressed woman who refused to give her name embarked on an impassioned diatribe, saying Mr. Chun should be jailed and not given any special treatment. Kim Eun Joo, a 29-year-old computer operator, said she believed it is improper to jail a former president and dangerous to encourage what she sees as political retribution. Until the last few days, opposition and ruling party politicians had seemed to agree on a rough formula for a political settlement - a public apology, return of any illegally acquired money, and a retreat to the countryside in return for an end to any prosecution. But since the demonstrations began, the opposition stance has hardened, with leading politicians like Kim Dae Jung saying they will abide by public opinion. Several newspapers have published editorials denouncing Mr. Chun and warning him that the longer he waits to apologize, the more precarious his position will become. Growing public antagonism toward Mr. Chun has increased pressure on Mr. Roh, who is on a 12-day visit to neighboring Asian countries. While he said in an interview three weeks ago that he would not intercede with Mr. Chun, members of his own party are pushing him to act. Students say they seek to force out President Roh in the future. They denounce him as equally culpable for the abuses of the past. They say they are planning frequent demonstrations over the next few weeks. Few Koreans seem prepared right now to go that far. ''After the Olympics, the Roh Tae Woo regime got lots of confidence from the people, but he hasn't gotten over the problem of past corruption,'' said Kim Duk Soo, the businessman."
