"On the 10th anniversary of President Ferdinand E. Marcos's declaration of martial law, the three major opposition parties in the Philippines issued a joint statement today accusing the present regime of bringing the country to the ''brink of disaster.'' ''One-man rule must go,'' said the statement by the Filipino Democratic Party, the Liberal Party and the United Nationalist Democratic Organization. ''Ten years have been too long. There must be a limit to the damage anyone can do to his country,'' the statement said. ''After 10 years, we have a society on the brink of disaster.'' ''Unable to deceive their people any longer, the Marcoses themselves will spend the 10th anniversary of their dictatorship in the land of their sponsors, to report on a 'job well done' for the imperialist masters,'' the statement said, referring to the current visit to the United States by President Marcos and his wife, Imelda. Marcos Denies Torture Report Mr. Marcos, appearing on the CBS program ''Morning News,'' described as ''exaggerated'' a report issued Tuesday by Amnesty International, the human rights organization, on repression and torture in the Philippines. The report referred to widespread torture, political arrests and murders by Government agents. In response, Mr. Marcos conceded there had been ''some cases'' of torture but said that those responsible had been punished. Mr. Marcos, 65 years old, lifted eight years of martial law last year and was elected to a new six-year term. He is making his first official visit in 16 years to the United States and plans to return to Manila on Tuesday. 60,000 Said to Have Died The opposition parties' statement was released to reporters by Mayor Aquilino Pimentel of Cagayan, who said it was an indication of the unity against Mr. Marcos and martial law. According to the statement, 60,000 Filipinos have died in fighting between troops and rebels since martial law was imposed.  ''We groan,'' it said, ''under the burden of an appalling foreign debt incurred to fund militarization and a manifold expansion of the military to protect this regime from the people, to fuel a perverse penchant for lavish and useless monuments and palaces, to sate the insatiable gut of graft and corruption of the Marcoses and their craven cronies.'' ''There is neither law nor justice to protect the people from abuse of power,'' the statement said. ''The press is controlled, the Batasan (legislature) is an overpriced rubber stamp, and the judiciary, the crown jewel of yesteryear, has lost its lustrous independence.''"
