"A group of 22 Democratic and Republican Senators has asked Secretary of State George P. Shultz to seek access for international relief agencies to the strife- ridden regions of East Timor in Indonesia. In a letter to Mr. Shultz, the Senators, led by Dave Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota, said, ''Such a presence could go a long way to curbing abuses and aiding in food distribution.'' East Timor, whose population is heavily Christian, was taken over in 1975 by Indonesia, where Moslems are predominant, after the Portuguese colonial authorities withdrew. Since then international relief agencies estimte that 150,000 people have died from violence or famine. Senator Durenberger, in a statement, said: ''We're seeing mounting concern over human rights abuses in places like Central America, and rightly so. But here's a little country called East Timor - a place that's not in the daily headlines, a place most Americans have never even heard of - where we have good reason to believe citizens are facing the most formidable hardships, and losing the most basic human rights.'' Full-Scale Fighting Reported The Senators said in their letter that full-scale fighting had recently resumed between East Timorese insurgents belonging to an organization called Fretilin and Indonesian forces, dashing hopes of truce negotiations. Among the signers of the letter were the New York Senators, Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat, and Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican, plus Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, and Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut. Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado and a candidate for the Democratic Presidential nomination, also signed the letter. The Senators said the situation in East Timor could be improved by a resumption of access for the International Committee of the Red Cross, the United Nation Children's Emergency Fund, the Catholic Relief Services and similar agencies. ''We therefore ask that you impress upon the Indonesian Government the urgency of permitting such full-time and unrestricted access as soon as possible,'' the Senators said to Mr. Shultz. ''We hear regular reports of systematic abuses of fundamental human rights, including relocation, detention, denial of visitation and atrocity. ''We are particularly alarmed that Amnesty International has obtained what it claims is an Indonesian field manual which includes instructions on the use of torture during interrogation,'' they said."
