"To the Editor: ''Burma's Road to Self-Liberation'' (editorial, Aug. 27) helped put into perspective the revolution in the major cities of Burma against the military-backed Government. But in focusing on the revolution, you ignored the longstanding civil war between the indigenous minorities in the hills and on the borders of Burma and the Government. This civil war has been in progress 41 years, and hardly anyone has taken note. Knowledge of the struggles of the minorities, isolated and berated as bandits, opium growers, opium traders and malcontents by Gen. Ne Win and the military leaders, has been suppressed from the majority in Burma's heartland. Thus, the majority was unaware that the minorities' call for democracy, a multiparty political system and human rights is exactly what they now fight for. The Burmese majority seems to have forgotten that it approached the minorities in 1947, during the struggle for independence from Britain, and promised them equality, autonomy and the right to preserve and protect their cultures and traditions. It was Aung San, the leader of the nationalist struggle, who went to Panglong in the Shan States and made these promises in the name of the nationalist movement. Most of the minorities accepted his word - only the Karens refused - and after independence and the Government's violation of the promises, one minority after another protested and then went into revolt. There might have been a peaceful resolution in 1962, had the military not seized power. U Nu, the last elected leader under the constitutional system, invited all the minority leaders to Rangoon to discuss their problems and work out acceptable solutions. As the meetings were drawing to a close, the military struck, arrested all the leaders and began to rewrite history, as well as to reconstruct the political system. The minorities have not forgotten either the promises of Aung San or the mistreatment of their people and their cultures by the army and the Government of Burma. For the last quarter-century the military rulers have controlled the news media, and in their construction of events, the minorities in revolt were painted in the darkest colors. The refusal by the minorities to accept the 1974 constitution, which replaced federalism with a unitary system, was seen as proof that they were unwilling to join the rest of Burma on the road to socialism and insisted on remaining backward and feudal. During the Ne Win period, the Burmese majority had no way of knowing what the minorities wanted and how they were being treated. Those in the Burmese heartland were unaware that last spring, Amnesty International issued two well-documented reports on human-rights violations by the military in its endless war against the minorities. Few in Rangoon know that the 10 largest minorities are united in the National Democratic Front; that they do not want to secede or fight against the Burmese peoples, and that they have publicly declared that they want to be part of a democratic federal union in which they can enjoy equality, liberty and autonomy. The minorities are on record supporting the revolution by the people in the Burma heartland and stand ready to join their own struggle to that of the majority. There can be no lasting peace in Burma, no development and no democracy unless the civil war and the revolution are addressed together. Any new government must declare a truce in the fighting against the minorities and invite their leaders to participate in the settlements that will be made. History does not repeat itself exactly, and this is not 1947; however, it should be clear to the people in Rangoon that their lives and future are tied up with those of the minorities, and unless they can work together for the common good, their struggle will not bring the lasting peace and economic improvement they so desperately want. JOSEF SILVERSTEIN New Brunswick, N.J., Aug. 28, 1988   The writer is a professor of political science at Rutgers University."
