"The United States Ambassador to China, James Lilley, called demonstrators against Chinese human-rights abuses ""cowards"" when they confronted him here Saturday night, and he suggested that one man, a Tibetan, ""go back to China and serve China."" But in a speech a few minutes later, Mr. Lilley said the United States wanted to see ""concrete improvement on China's human rights record,"" and referred to the lifting of martial law in Tibet as ""window dressing."" Representative John Miller, Republican of Washington, said today that Mr. Lilley should apologize for his remarks, made to protesters outside the closing ceremony of a four-day trade exposition and symposium on relations between the United States and China. Mr. Lilley got into the argument with a handful of demonstrators outside Union Station before going inside to make his speech. Most of those outside the former train station did not notice the exchange, but it was taped by a Seattle television station, KIRO. Mr. Lilley and China's Ambassador to the United States, Zhu Quizhen, arrived in cars at the side of the station. About 50 demonstrators were at the front of the building, waving signs andchanting slogans condemning the Chinese Government's slaying of hundreds of demonstrators in Beijing in June 1989 and its 40-year occupation of Tibet. Jim Berman, a Seattle resident whose wife is Tibetan, said he and a half-dozen others left the main group on the chance the ambassadors might use a side entrance. They chanted ""China -- human rights!"", ""Tibet for Tibetans!"" and ""Remember Tiananmen Square!"" he said. Mr. Zhu ignored the demonstrators and went inside, Mr. Berman said. But Mr. Berman said, and the KIROvideotape corroborated, that Mr. Lilley suddenly shouted, ""Were you at Tiananmen Square? I was there."" ""So what?"" Mr. Berman said he replied. ""I know it wasn't the greatest retort,"" Mr. Berman said afterward, ""but I certainly didn't expect his outburst."" Mr. Lilley then shouted to a Tibetan man: ""What are you doing about it? I'm doing something about it. You should go back to China and serve China."""
