"Amnesty International said that Wei Jingsheng, China's most prominent political prisoner, is reported to have died in prison while serving a 15-year sentence for ''counterrevolutionary crimes.'' The international human rights group said in a report yesterday that it had received reports of Mr. Wei's death, but that it had not been able to confirm them. In Beijing, Wang Mingdi, of the Justice Ministry, described the report of Mr. Wei's death as ''untrue.'' Mr. Wang, the Deputy Chief of the ministry's Labor Reform Bureau, provided no details. A senior State Department official said the United States had no evidence that Mr. Wei, who is 37 years old, had died. Mr. Wei, the son of a Communist Party official, came to international attention in 1979 when he wrote a series of articles in underground magazines that also appeared on Beijing's short-lived Democracy Wall calling for greater democracy in China. Mr. Wei was perhaps best known for his demand that the Communists add a fifth modernization, democracy, to Deng Xiaoping's list of four modernizations that China was trying to achieve. They included agriculture, industry, science and defense. Economy and Democracy Linked Mr. Wei asserted in often acerbic tones that China would never achieve real economic progress without more democracy in the Communist Party and Government. He was arrested in the spring of 1979 not long after writing an article asking: ''Does Deng Xiaoping want democracy? The answer is no.'' At his trial that November, Mr. Wei argued that China's Constitution gave him the right of free speech and that if the Chinese could not criticize their leaders, there was little difference between the rule of Mr. Deng and the infamous Gang of Four during the Cultural Revolution of 1966-76. ''The Constitution gives the people the right to criticize leaders because they are human beings and not deities,'' Mr. Wei told the court. ''Criticism cannot possibly be nice and appealing to the ear.'' Merle Goldman, a professor of history at Boston University and a leading authority on Chinese intellectuals under the Communists, said Mr. Wei's death would be terribly ironic because many leaders of the party have now said China's economic changes cannot continue without greater democracy. Was Once a Red Guard ''It is a real tragedy because there have even been editorials in The People's Daily saying the same thing Wei said,'' Dr. Goldman said last night. Mr. Wei, a onetime Red Guard in the Cultural Revolution who worked as an electrician at the Beijing Zoo before his arrest, had been held at a ''labor reform camp'' in Qinghai in remote northwestern China, according to Amnesty International. Qinghai is a desolate, arid and mountainous region that contains many of the labor camps. Amnesty International said Mr. Wei had been suffering from kidney and heart ailments and had lost all his teeth. ''His condition was said to have resulted from his conditions of imprisonment in Beijing during the first years of his imprisonment and the lack of medical care afterward,'' it said."
