"Amnesty International issued its annual report on human rights in 117 countries today and took note of what it said was a large number of people who have been attacked by their governments for calling attention to human rights abuses. The activists, the report said, are only a handful among the thousands who have been tortured, kidnapped, killed or imprisoned in cages, malaria-infested ''re-education camps'' or psychiatric hospitals in the calendar year 1983, which the report details. But the few named, it said, ''must stand as symbols for the rest.'' Among those singled out by the organization, which won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1977 , was America Yolanda Urizar, a Guatemalan labor lawyer abducted in March 1983 by heavily armed men, driven away in an army jeep and never seen again. Another was Levko Lukyanenko, a Soviet lawyer who Amnesty said was serving his second 15-year sentence for trying to monitor his Government's compliance with human rights provisions of the 1975 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, Teacher Held in Benin  Also singled out was Paul Koudoukpo, a teacher who was said to have been arrested in Benin in 1982 and held since without trial on suspicion of distributing leaflets calling for the release of 35 students and teachers arrested from 1979 to 1981 after criticizing the Government's education policy. Milan Soklic, a sociology teacher, was sentenced to five years in prison in Yugoslavia for comparing capitalism favorably with Yugoslav socialism and complaining about restrictions on freedom of expression in the presence of several people at his home and in a hotel, the report said. Sofya Belyak, a Roman Catholic Church organist from the Ukraine, was sentenced in October 1983 to five years in prison and five years of internal exile, according to the report, for circulating pamphlets on the reported appearance of the Virgin Mary at Fatima in Portugal in May 1917. Ly Dai Nguyen, a Vietnamese writer and literary critic, the report said, has been detained for ''re-education'' for more than eight years without charge or trial. Illness in Vietnam Camps  Amnesty International said it continued to receive reports that many detainees in the ''re-education'' camps in Vietnam, where 10,000 are believed held, were suffering from serious illnesses, including malaria, tuberculosis, heart ailments and malnutrition. The report also noted the tendency to torture victims. In Bangladesh, it said, prisoners were beaten, whipped, hung upside down from the ceiling and shocked. In Iran, it said, the whipping was done with whips, cables, hosepipes and wooden strips bound with wire. To induce confessions, Amnesty said, relatives are also tortured. In Guinea, where all political detainees were held incommunicado, detainees have been executed with the ''black diet,'' total deprivation of food and water, the report said. In Gabon, it said, prisoners are held in chains for long periods of time. In Chile, the report said, hundreds have testified to beatings, shocks, and such public punishment as being made to run barefoot and sometimes naked in the street, sometimes on broken glass. In El Salvador, it said, Rafael Carias Flores, a teachers' union leader who was arrested in February 1981 and held without trial until his release in April 1983 was tortured with sulphuric acid."
