"To the Editor: In ''Cambodia's Nonstop Ordeal'' (Op-Ed, March 21), Arnold R. Isaacs gave a good background of the last 18 years in Cambodia, but stopped short of suggesting a solution. It was incorrect to state that no Western nation lifted a finger to stop the post-1975 Khmer Rouge killing. In 1977, the United States, along with Australia, Canada, Norway and Britain, began to raise Pol Pot's human rights abuses. On the other hand, one needs to explain why the Cambodian non-Communists decided to join forces with the Khmer Rouge to fight Vietnam's occupation. This marriage of convenience reflected their common fear that Cambodia might be totally Vietnamized if there were no resistance to Vietnam's colonization. The situation is like having German Jews and the Nazis in an alliance to fight an invading alien army. Not only should Washington continue helping the people who are fighting for their freedom, but also should play a more active role in seeking a political settlement of the Cambodian-Vietnamese conflict. The Reagan Administration, in its discussions of regional conflicts affecting United States-Soviet relations, should remain firm in demanding that the Soviet Union stop supporting Hanoi's expansionist policies. Vietnam, one of the world's poorest nations, should concentrate its efforts on improving its economy. The Western world is prepared to provide economic aid to help rebuild the country as soon as Vietnam withdraws its forces from Cambodia. Hanoi will then be able to regain the peace it has lost after having won the war. In an attempt to break the political stalemate, Prince Norodom Sihanouk has unilaterally decided to hold unofficial talks with Vietnam's puppet Prime Minister, Hun Sen, himself a former Khmer Rouge. The United States has endorsed this initiative and should continue to support the Prince's search for a peaceful solution. It is important, however, to recognize that peace will not last long in Cambodia if there is no national reconciliation. Cambodia's future government should not be dominated by the pro-Chinese Khmer Rouge nor the pro-Vietnamese Heng Samrin regime. A neutral government led by Prince Sihanouk would be ideal. In the meanwhile, the United States should carry on its humanitarian policies by providing aid to the displaced Cambodians and by maintaining the same intake of refugees and immigrants fleeing from Southeast Asia. SICHAN SIV   New York, March 21, 1988"
