"President Reagan arrived today on this Indonesian island on the first major stop of his trip to the Far East, but the occasion was marred, White House officials said, when the Indonesian Government detained two Australian journalists in the President's party and barred them from the country. In a separate incident, Indonesian authorities detained and expelled Barbara Crossette, a correspondent for The New York Times who was seeking to report on the Reagan visit. [Page A6]. Moments before Mr. Reagan was greeted at the island's airport by President Suharto, the Indonesian leader, and colorfully clad Balinese dancers, Indonesian authorities removed the two Australians from the White House press plane. Ordered to Leave Country The journalists, from the Australian Broadcasting Corporation, were ordered to leave the country in a move that White House officials said highlighted sharp differences between the United States and Indonesia over press and political freedoms. The two correspondents, Jim Middleton and Richard D. Palfreyman, are based in Washington and had been told that they would not be allowed to enter, despite the protests of American officials, following unfavorable reports in the Australian press about the wealth of President Suharto. Uniformed Indonesian customs and security officials took the Australians into custody over the protests of Edward P. Djerejian, a deputy White House press secretary. ''The decision has been made. There is no change,'' an Indonesian official told Mr. Djerejian, in an exchange that capped a day of tense communications between American and Indonesian officials. Atmosphere of Growing Concern Senior aides to Mr. Reagan spent most of the time operating in an atmosphere of increasing concern as the President's party flew toward Indonesia. At one point, aboard the Presidential jet, Air Force One, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said, ''We do not know what will happen when we get there.'' Other Reagan aides said the development ran directly contrary to the ''winds of freedom'' theme that Mr. Reagan has adopted for the trip. The theme is intended to assert that democracy and economic growth in an environment of freedom are on the rise throughout the world. Administration officials have avoided direct criticism of the Suharto Government, which has been criticized for human-rights abuses, including the handling of dissent and the independence movements in East Timor and West Irian.  Improvements Are Stressed Instead, they have said while Indonesia has had serious human-rights violations in the past, there have been improvements in the situation in this country and that abuses were worse in nearby Communist-ruled nations. In addition, some officials have sought to portray the development today in the context of longstanding Indonesian-Australian strains over issues such as East Timor's status. In his first visit to this Asian country, Mr. Reagan had hoped to keep the spotlight off criticism of the lack of freedom under the 20-year authoritarian rule of Mr. Suharto, while highlighting the country's steady economic growth and its role in regional stability. ''This unnecessarily detracts from the main purpose of the trip,'' a senior Reagan adviser said in expressing concern over the press incident. Another Reagan aide said: ''The winds of freedom have hit a wind shear. The Indonesians have hurt themselves.'' Mr. Reagan had accepted an invitation to visit Indonesia after canceling a planned trip to the Far East in 1983 after the assassination of Benigno S. Aquino Jr., the Philippine opposition leader. Themes for Tokyo Meeting Administration officials had explained the acceptance as an attempt by the President to salve bruised Indonesian feelings caused by the cancellation and as a way that Mr. Reagan could promote the themes of economic and political freedom that he will take to the annual meeting of seven leading industrialized democracies that will begin Sunday in Tokyo. He will also hold talks Thursday with the members of the Association of South East Asian Nations - the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Brunei and Indonesia. Mr. Reagan, who arrived in Indonesia from Honolulu after a brief rest and refueling stop in Guam, made no remarks at Ngurah Rai Airport, where he was greeted by President Suharto. However, several top officials aboard Air Force One, including Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Donald T. Regan, the White House chief of staff, and Vice Adm. John M. Poindexter, the national security adviser, spent much of the afternoon conferring with American officials in Indonesia. Effort to Overturn Order The American Ambassador to Indonesia, Paul D. Wolfowitz, met with Indonesian officials while Mr. Reagan was en route in a last-minute attempt to overturn the order on the Australians. It was the second such meeting in the last week on the matter. Although Mr. Djejerian accompanied the reporters when they were detained, he was not allowed to immediately enter an airport room where they were taken. Inside, they were greeted by two Australian Government officials and detained by five uniformed Indonesian officials, including one who asked questions as he examined their passports. Mr. Djerjerian was eventually allowed in, after repeatedly protesting the decision to bar him. At one point, he produced his Government identification card and proclaimed to an Indonesia official, ''I am an assistant to the President and it is important that I get in there.'' The reporters were to leave Indonesia tonight on a commercial airliner for Tokyo."
