"A bipartisan group of senators and representatives, citing reports of widespread hunger and human rights abuses in East Timor, has urged the Indonesian Government to allow international relief agencies into the area. At the same time, the lawmakers called for a Senate inquiry into the impact of the Indonesian takeover of East Timor seven years ago and the famine and violence that have beset the island, a former Portugese colony, since then. The Congressional move came in advance of a scheduled visit to Washington next week by President Suharto of Indonesia.  ''In the past there has been very little attention paid to this tragedy, partly because no one ever heard of East Timor, and partly because access has been limited,'' said Senator David Durenberger, Republican of Minnesota. ''The more news that comes out, the more that Congress is going to start asking some hard questions about U.S. policy, particularly arms sales and human rights policies.'' 100,000 Die in Famine At least 100,000 people died in a famine in East Timor, a predominantly Roman Catholic territory, after the Indonesian annexation. Representative Tony P. Hall, Democrat of Ohio, said recently that the 1975 famine was comparable to the ones in Biafra and Cambodia. He said that ''serious food shortages resulting from Indonesian military operations'' continued but were largely unnoticed because of restrictions by Indonesia on foreign journalists and other visitors. In recent years, an insurgency against Indonesia has added to the disruption, resulting in the loss of civil rights for the people of East Timor, according to Congressional critics of Indonesia. ''We recognize the importance of Indonesia to United States foreign policy and to stability within the region,'' a group of senators said in a letter to Secretary of State George P. Shultz. ''We applaud as well the apparent improvements made during 1981. But we are deeply concerned that the situation may deteriorate, and we are deeply disturbed at the reports of famine.'' U.S. Is Asked to Mediate The senators, including Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, and Alfonse D'Amato, Republican of New York, urged the Indonesians to permit ''humanitarian contributions of food and medical supplies for the Timorese,'' as well as a ''complete survey of the actual situation in East Timor by approppriate international relief and humanitarian agencies.'' The senators also called on the Reagan Administration to ''mediate with the Indonesians'' to allow the reunification of families in East Timor and Portugal. Among the signers of the letter to Mr. Shultz were Senators Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington; Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas; Richard G. Lugar, Republican of Indiana; John Heinz and Arlen Specter, Republicans of Pennsylvania; Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, and Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon. Senator Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, was urged to hold hearings to ''determine as accurately as possible the actual situation in East Timor.'' The senators said the Indonesian takeover, which followed the collapse of the Portugese colonial system, ''resulted in the forcible annexation of East Timor.'' ''United States policy has been to accept this unilateral annexation as a fact of life without recognizing that an act of selfdetermination by the Timorese people has taken place,'' they said."
