"Dear President Bush, In a short time, you will be sitting down with Deng Xiaoping in Beijing. There will be many pressing matters on your agenda, but none more vital than insuring that Cambodia becomes free after the Vietnamese troops withdraw and that the Khmer Rouge, who are supplied by the Chinese, do not fill the vacuum. ''The Khmer Rouge problem'' sounds dry and abstract. But there is nothing academic about what the Khmer Rouge would do if they are able to return to power in Cambodia or even a portion of the country. For several months, we have been treated to a preview, with the Khmer Rouge forcing back perhaps 16,000 civilians from closed camps along the Thai border into the interior of Cambodia. Forced labor, including ammunition porterage, is required of civilians. Those pushed back are often subjected to artillery fire from the Vietnamese side, caught in a cross-fire between the two Communist camps. The number of casualties is unknown, for the Khmer Rouge have not permitted the civilians to enter the internationally supported hospitals on the border. So far, the world has remained relatively silent on these human rights abuses. It is high time that the international community take steps to open up these concentration camps along the border and give the civilians the right to move elsewhere. Over the past few weeks, there has been growing awareness of the Khmer Rouge's activities and strength. But an effective plan to block them is not likely to be proposed by any of the parties, including Moscow and Beijing. Hence, the need for American leadership. Given this context and the extraordinary stakes, I would suggest that you appoint a senior official to take responsibility as special envoy for Cambodian affairs, including, most importantly, coordinating American efforts to block the Khmer Rouge and to help bring a peaceful settlement. Such an envoy could also address the problems of the displaced Cambodians along the Thai-Cambodian border, particularly civilians under the Khmer Rouge yoke. Recently, 27 senators wrote Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, urging him to have the U.S. take the lead in preventing a Khmer Rouge resurgence. Their letter is a reminder that the American people and their elected representatives from both parties abhor the Khmer Rouge and will not tolerate their return to power. The Senators concluded: ''The fact that the Khmer Rouge have been nursed back to health underscores the importance of an international effort to prevent new Khmer Rouge terror and bloodshed in the killing fields of Cambodia. We look forward to supporting your initiatives that advance the likelihood of a political solution in Cambodia and that maintain the U.S. refugee protection and resettlement policies we have fought to protect.'' I hope that under your leadership, America and China can work together to prevent a Khmer Rouge return. If America does not now take the lead, Cambodia's holocaust could happen again."
