"Indonesia's Foreign Minister defended his Government's role in East Timor today, and said that reports of widespread hunger and human rights abuses on the island were ''untrue.'' At the same time the Foreign Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, said that President Suharto of Indonesia, in his meetings Tuesday with President Reagan and ranking Administration officials, voiced concern about possible United States efforts to press Japan to expand its military role for defense of sea lanes in the northern Pacific. Such a potential move has already stirred strong reactions among officials in the Philippines as well as Indonesia, two nations that suffered heavily at Japan's hands during World War II. ''People in the United States feel Japan should share the burden, and we understand that, we have no problem with that so long as it is for the defense of Japan,'' the 53-year-old Foreign Minister said in an interview at the Indonesian Embassy. ''But based on past experience, where does it stop? There were hints that sharing the burden would mean some policeman role, and Japan would be given some task in Asia to lighten the U.S. presence.'' ''Certainly we hope they will not be given such a task,'' said Mr.  Mochtar, a lawyer who has received legal training at Yale, Harvard and the University of Chicago. The Foreign Minister said that ''it was made clear to us'' that the United States had no intention of supporting a major buildup of Japan's military forces to include a ''policeman's role'' in the Pacific. Confusion Over Sea Defense What has confused the issue somewhat is that Japan has apparently agreed to take responsibility for sea defense up to 1,000 nautical miles from Tokyo Bay, which is short of Philippine and Indonesian waters. But if measured from Okinawa - and Japanese officials have been vague on the subject - the 1,000 miles would carry into Southeast Asian waters. ''We prefer to defend ourselves,'' said Mr. Mochtar.  The Indonesian Foreign Minister, who is traveling with President Suharto, said he was ''aware of the concern'' of many members of Congress about the situation in East Timor, the former Portuguese colony that Indonesia took over seven years ago. Since then there have been reports of famine and human rights abuses on the island, which has remained off limits to most foreigners. Mr. Mochtar said the current charges were ''untrue.'' He added: ''Somehow these things are repeated over and over again at the time of the General Assembly meeting.'' The Foreign Minister said the Indonesian Government had recently allowed four diplomats from the United States Embassy in Jakarta into East Timor as well as representatives of the United Nations Children's Fund and the International Committee of the Red Cross into East Timor. ''They have reported favorably that conditions are improving, that there's no famine,'' said Mr. Mochtar. 'Situation Well in Hand' He added: ''The situation is well in hand now. It's not easy. Roads are very undeveloped so we have to carry stuff in helicopters. It's very costly but we are doing it.'' Mr. Mochtar said that a key reason Indonesia has barred most journalists from visiting East Timor was the poor network of roads which forced visitors to hire helicopters, sometimes costing thousands of dollars. The diplomat said President Reagan's unexpected announcement last night that he was appointing Assistant Secretary of State John H.  Holdridge as Ambassador to Indonesia was ''a very good thing.'' Mr.  Reagan made the announcement during a state dinner in honor of President Suharto. The announcement seemed to end one of the most gnawing problems in United States-Indonesian relations over the last year: the failure to appoint an ambassador to Indonesia after President Suharto had apparently rejected the Reagan Administration's choice, Morton I.  Abramowitz, a career diplomat and former Ambassador to Thailand. Today Mr. Mochtar denied that Indonesia had rejected Mr.  Abramowitz, who has been the target of some conservatives on Capitol Hill. Mr. Mochtar said that when Mr. Abramowitz's name first reached Indonesia last October, ''We indicated we would rather not have someone who was controversial.'' He added that last April Indonesia had received a letter seeking its approval of Mr. Abramowitz. ''We had not replied,'' said Mr. Mochtar. ''And all of a sudden the statement was made here in Washington that we had rejected him, which was not true. We didn't reject him.'' ''I consider this an internal thing on your side,'' said Mr.  Mochtar. ''I was as much puzzled as anyone else.'' Suharto Visits Space Center CAPE CANAVERAL, Fla., Oct. 13 (UPI) - President Suharto, accompanied by his wife and a large entourage, visited the Kennedy Space Center today. An Indonesian Airways DC-10 carrying the presidential party flew into the space center at midafternoon from Washington. The plane landed on the same runway that eventually will be used when shuttles return to the Cape."
