"It's rare for the staid American Bar Association to excoriate friendly foreign countries for human rights abuses. It has now done so in the scandalous instance of the Philippines, where lawyers who defend victims in political cases are mysteriously killed. At least three have been murdered and five arrested, one on the peculiar charge of ''human rights lawyering.'' And as the rule of law totters, a Communist guerrilla movement grows, its chief asset being the rickety and corrupt regime of President Ferdinand Marcos. Mr. Marcos can shrug off the A.B.A. protest and all others like it for two bad reasons. The United States can do something about one of them. His own democratic opponents are so divided that he has threatened them with an instant presidential election to prolong his 20-year rule. His other card is America's reliance on Clark Air Base and the naval base at Subic Bay. He used it again to fend off a prudent move in Congress to put more distance between Washington and the Marcos dynasty. The House voted to cut $75 million from an Administration request for $100 million in military aid, while increasing economic aid from $95 million to $155 million - with the requirement that a fourth of food aid be channeled through private groups. Manila instantly threatened to abrogate the base agreement, arguing that the $100 million military aid figure constituted ''rent,'' which it doesn't. The five-year base agreement calls for a total of $900 million in military and economic aid, to be apportioned by Congress. Rather than call Mr. Marcos's bluff, House conferees yielded to Senate wishes, raising military aid to $70 million and agreeing to recommend, rather than require, that food aid be distributed by private groups. The problem of diversion should be taken seriously by the Administration. There have been damaging charges of extensive overseas investments by senior Marcos officials. A second wise step would be to begin an energetic search for alternate sites - Guam, Australia and Saipan among them - to U.S. naval and air bases in the Philippines. As long as Mr. Marcos believes that Americans will swallow anything to keep those bases, he can disregard America's worried attempts to press for constitutional change. Nor is military aid the first requirement in containing the insurgent challenge of the New People's Army. Its guns have come from the Government's demoralized and sometimes brutal army, and its most potent slogan is opposition to the ''U.S.-Marcos dictatorship.'' Most Filipinos reject that linkage, and are still bound to the United States by language, culture and political tradition. To maintain them, America needs ways to escape a desperate dictator's embrace."
