"When Tibetans rose in protest against Chinese repression last fall, Congress condemned China for human rights failures. Beijing in turn condemned the U.S. for meddling. Now new protests shake Lhasa just as the Chinese Foreign Minister visits Washington to discuss ever-stronger bilateral relations. A reminder, however diplomatic, is in order: For Americans, human rights are as much a part of foreign policy as economics. China's leaders charge that criticism of its Tibet policies is ill informed. Tibet was feudalistic when Chinese armed forces invaded in 1950. Tibetans' living standard, while still among China's poorest, has greatly improved. The Cultural Revolution, which brought death and destruction to all of China, was especially hard on Tibet; hundreds of thousands died. But these excesses have been lamented and partly redressed. There is growing freedom of religion and growing freedom to express in dress and language the Tibetan cultural heritage. Still, Asia Watch, a human rights organization, recently reported arbitrary arrests and imprisonment, torture and forced abortions and harsh repression of political activism. Since last year's protests, Tibet has been largely closed to Westerners. Those allowed in report profound resentment at China's assertions of calm restored and problems resolved. China describes criticism from the United States as meddling. But there are now 20,000 Chinese students on U.S. campuses, bilateral trade is expected to reach $9 billion this year and American investments in China since 1979 total $3 billion. Such contacts do not grow in a vacuum. It may not be up to Americans to prescribe the form of independence, greater autonomy or federation for Tibet. But sympathy for a downtrodden people is a proper American concern. Fearing the loss of a rich 1,300-year-old culture is a proper concern. Pleading for a constructive dialogue with Tibetan activists is a proper concern, and not only for Americans. China's long years of isolation may have been conveniently free of international criticism, but the price of convenience was stagnation. Beijing knows that as it now steers China further into an international role. That brings rich international rewards, as China has already found. It also brings international judgments."
