"To the Editor: The Aug. 12 news article by Christopher Wren on Chinese ''reeducation through labor'' (''laojiao'') camps makes these institutions seem like a cross between Police Athletic League and Civilian Conservation Corps camps. Unfortunately, they are far more than that - they are rather unpleasant prison camps. According to a recent Amnesty International study (''Political Imprisonment in the People's Republic of China,'' 1978), the ''normal'' workday at these prison camps is 8 to 12 hours of physical labor, not counting travel time. The prisoners are also supposed to receive one day off every week or fortnight. Both of these limitations are often violated during times of intense production. The harshness of this regimen is worsened by the inadequate food supplied to the prisoners. At most they receive three-fourths of the intake necessary to do the expected work and still maintain good health. But those who because of illness do not meet their production goals can have their rations further reduced. Contrary to the impression produced by the article, one need not commit such heinous ''crimes'' as ''petty thievery or seduction'' in order to be sent by the police, without trial, to a ''laojiao'' camp for three or four years. All one need do is be hungry and jobless, and complain about it. Such was the case with Wei Yuehua. She was arrested about two and a half years ago in Hangzhou after displaying banners and posters demanding ''work and food.'' We believe her sentence to be between two and four years at a ''laojiao'' camp. Such arbitrary treatment for exercising her right to free speech is, of course, a violation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the Constitution of the People's Republic of China.  Repeated inquiries directed by Amnesty International groups in three countries to various Chinese officials have not been answered. We have been able to learn nothing about her whereabouts, her health or even if she is still alive. Wei is just one prisoner whose name and circumstances we know.  There are countless more about whom we know nothing. Many of these are left over from the purges of the fifties. PETER J. GOLLON, Adoption Group 156, Amnesty International, U.S.A., Huntington Station, L.I., Aug. 17, 1982"
