"Opposition groups threatened to disrupt the start of President Ferdinand E. Marcos's official trip to the United States Tuesday and to stage protests against what they say are human rights violations in the Philippines. The 65-year-old Mr. Marcos, who has not visited Washington in 16 years, will be accorded full military and ceremonial honors when he is officially welcomed by President Reagan at the White House Thursday. Officials in Manila, guarding against what they charge are efforts to disrupt the trip with terrorism and protests, maintained silence on the eve of Mr. Marcos's departure on his exact itinerary and gave only scant details of his two-week tour in the United States. ''President Marcos leaves Tuesday evening for the United States to undertake an historic state visit at the invitation of President Ronald Reagan,'' the Government-owned Philippine News Agency reported this evening. Officials would not say when Mr. Marcos would leave the capital, but they said he would stop in Honolulu to board Air Force One for the trip to Andrews Air Force Base, Va. Talks on U.S. Bases Mr. Marcos's wife, Imelda, as well as hundreds of advance men are already in the United States awaiting the President's arrival.  The President's talks with Mr. Reagan are expected to focus on the two United States military installations in the Philippines and development and military aid. He will be taken from Andrews Air Force Base to the Washington Monument Wednesday by helicopter, where he will be greeted by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, officials said. Anti-Marcos groups in Manila scheduled a Tuesday afternoon ''national prayer rally'' outside a downtown cathedral to protest the United States visit and what they said were human rights violations in the country of 50 million people. An opposition spokesman said tonight that more than 5,000 people were expected to attend the rally outside the downtown Manila Cathedral. Opposition groups in the United States vowed earlier this month to follow Mr. Marcos's every move with ''peaceful protests'' from the moment of his arrival. Mr. Marcos is expected to travel to New York to address the United Nations General Assembly and the Philippine-American Chamber of Commerce."
