"Amnesty International expressed concern today for the safety of about 40 people in East Timor said to have been arrested for taking part in a pro-independence protest in front of Pope John Paul II last week when he visited the disputed Indonesian province. The human rights organization issued what it called an ''urgent action,'' saying it had received reports of mistreatment by Indonesian security forces, including electrical shocks administered to some of those in custody. ''On the basis of the reports available and on the past pattern of ill-treatment of political prisoners in East Timor, there is reason to be concerned,'' Geoffrey Robinson, an Amnesty researcher, said in a telephone interview from London. Mr. Robinson said, however, that he was skeptical about reports circulating since last weekend that several demonstrators had been executed. Attempts to reach Indonesian Government spokesmen in Jakarta were unavailing, and a spokesman for the Indonesian Embassy in Washington said he had no information on the East Timor situation. The protest occurred last Thursday as the Pope was finishing an outdoor Mass on a brief visit to East Timor, a former Portuguese colony that Indonesia invaded and annexed in 1976. In his homily, John Paul admonished the Indonesian Government to respect human rights in the territory, whose absorption by Jakarta is not recognized by the United Nations or the Vatican. Over the years, international rights groups have said that perhaps as many as 200,000 East Timorese out of a population of 650,000 were killed by Indonesian soldiers or had died after being mistreated. A continuing insurgency by guerrillas demanding independence for the territory is said to produce scores of deaths every year. The protest last week started when about 20 youths approached the Pope's altar and began chanting slogans calling for East Timor's independence. This turned into a chair-throwing brawl between demonstrators and police officers, and witnesses said they saw some young people being led away. Since then, reports of torture and even deaths have filtered out through Timorese exiles and pro-independence supporters in Portugal and Australia. But a Vatican spokesman said Monday as the Pope returned to Rome from his East Asian journey that he doubted there were any executions. Similarly, Mr. Robinson said today that ''we're inclined to be skeptical.'' But he said ''credible'' reports from East Timor and from Australia suggested that prisoners had been abused."
