"From a distance, the prospect of a democratic transition of power in the Philippines has never looked better. In truth, however, an opposition victory in the elections scheduled for Feb. 7 would be a small miracle - and with the opposition may also go the last real hope of democratic change. The chronically fragmented opposition has united behind a single slate. Corazon C. Aquino, the presidential candidate, embodies the quality that her opponent, President Ferdinand E. Marcos, most lacks - credibility. The widow of the slain opposition leader Benigno S. Aquino Jr., she describes herself as the ''best known . . . of Mr. Marcos's long list of victims,'' and she personifies the nation's many grievances against its president. Her running mate, Salvador H. Laurel, brings the organizational ccapabilities of the country's largest opposition party. Beyond this, their victory seems insured by the record of their opponent - a notoriously corrupt ruler who has plunged his nation into economic disaster and relies heavily on the support of a corrupt and bloated military known for human rights violations. Nevertheless, two quite different forces pose a formidable threat to the oppostion's prospects. First, President Marcos will stop at nothing. It is no secret that past elec-Diane Orentlicher, deputy director of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, is co-author of the committee's recent report, ''Salvaging'' Democracy: Human Rights in the Philippines.tions under his rule were marked by rampant corruption. This time, he has taken extraordinary steps to insure victory. It was no coincidence that he signed the bill establishing the election a year and a half ahead of schedule just hours after a Philippine court exonerated the army chief of staff, Gen. Fabian Ver, and 25 co-defendants -all but one of them military men - in connection with the assassination of Benigno Aquino. Plucked by their commander in chief from the reach of justice, the military can be counted on to repay its debt during the election. The security forces have routinely used terror to keep Mr. Marcos in power, and there is no reason to believe they will not do so now. Second, the rapidly escalating and increasingly violent Communist insurgency also poses a formidable challenge to the democratic opposition. The insurgents have benefited from the nation's grievances against President Marcos, and they have every reason to thwart the democratic opposition's bid for the presidency. A Marcos victory might even encourage the growth of their movement: If Filipinos learn that the democratic alternative is impotent, they will surely turn in increasing numbers to more violent efforts to bring about change. What does all this mean for American policy? It is too simple to say that the United States must press for fair elections. Of course it must. Congressmen and others should certainly observe the elections. But foreign observers may not be able to monitor either the votes sure to be bought by patronage or the military's inevitable intimidation of voters. The fact is, fair elections are hardly possible as long as the security forces have free reign to terrorize the electorate in remote provinces. And the United States must recognize that there can be no transition to genuine democracy in a country long terrorized by the military unless the very system of abuse is addressed head-on. To this end, American military aid to the Philippines should be tied to specific reforms. At a minimum, they should include: abolition of Amendment 6 to the Constitution, which vests lawmaking power in the President; abolition of the President's power of preventive detention; demonstrable progress in efforts to bring to justice those responsible for gross military abuses; and abolition of the Civilian Home Defense Forces, a particularly lawless force of civilian militiamen. Such measures should be implemented now, while there is still some hope of blunting the force of the army during the election. Imagine how much harder it would be press such changes on President Marcos the day after he won the election. It isn't hard to guess what he would demand: ''I gave you what you asked for - a trial in the Aquino case and then elections. Now give me more aid.''"
