"To the Editor: Pei Minxin's analysis of United States policy toward violations of human rights in China (''As Mr. Bush Partied in Beijing,'' Op-Ed, Feb. 28) is incomplete. While the United States has not made human rights a highly visible issue in its relations with China, the question has not been ignored. Indirect and undramatic support for human rights has been more important than Congressional resolutions and Presidential findings that balance the shortcomings and improvements in human rights in China. Most important, we provide a model of democracy. Some Chinese Marxist scholars argue that Western capitalism, with its extensive democracy and welfare mechanisms, has reached a new phase of ''social capitalism,'' a peaceful way in which society can become socialist. This remarkable and controversial analysis means that the United States can serve as a positive model for China. We are also enabling tens of thousands of Chinese students to live, study and work in this country. They absorb deep lessons about a democratic society and have already begun to influence China. Moreover, we are helping China's economy develop by facilitating trade, investment and technological exchange. China's new entrepreneurs and scientists are important supporters of China's own human rights movement. Finally, the Voice of America has done a great deal to inform China's many shortwave radio listeners about the world and events in China itself. Foreign criticism of human-rights violations in China may unnecessarily risk backlash. China is a very proud nation, which has felt oppressed by the West for a century and a half. Some Chinese leaders treat Western demands on human rights as a continuation of Western interference in China's internal affairs. Congressional resolutions about Tibet have had this result. Human rights will have a stronger foundation in China as the Chinese and their leaders demand expansion of human rights to create a better, more vigorous, more stable, stronger society. We are making an excellent albeit undramatic, contribution to this process. BEN STAVIS   Iowa City, March 1, 1989 The writer teaches political science at the University of Iowa."
