"More than 1,000 people crowded into the gymnasium of a seminary here today to call for the release of political detainees and the end of purported civil rights abuses by the Philippine military. The occasion was the 33d anniversary of the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. The rally was staged to test the recently restored freedoms of assembly and expression in the Philippines and to protest what the demonstrators call United States approval of Philippine human rights policies. In a ''people's trial,'' both President Ferdinand E. Marcos and the United States were found guilty of human rights violations against the Filipino people. ''We did not come here to celebrate'' said Jose B. L. Reyes, a former justice of the Supreme Court. ''Human rights is a myth in our country.'' The United States was given no defense. A large figure of Uncle Sam had only one line to deliver - the toast made by Vice President Bush at the re-inauguration of Mr. Marcos this year: ''We love your adherence to democratic principles and democratic processes.'' Signs of Growing Tolerance Such large church-sanctioned protests have become more common in the Philippines since martial law was lifted Jan. 17. Although protesters say abuses of their freedoms have not decreased since January, there have been signs of a growing tolerance of criticism and dissent. Unions, once prohibited by law from striking, have become increasingly active, and strikes have been occurring at the rate of one a day. Students, considered the strength of the opposition, have been given new rights of expression and assembly and the freedom to publish student newspapers. Incidents of bugging and student harassment have supposedly been stopped. A bill introduced last week would outlaw police interference in any legitimate student activity and ban infiltration of student groups. Slowly, the press has begun to test the limits of its new freedom to criticize the Government, even though self-censorship has prevented personal criticism of either Mr. Marcos or his wife, Imelda. Nevertheless, in a gesture of good will, Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile encouraged the press to expose all corruption, including scandals in the military. ''My office will be the first to protect you against intimidation from any performance of your legitimate journalistic duties,'' he said. Minister of Labor Blas F. Ople has called for public accountability for Philippine agencies and institutions. The Development Bank of the Philippines, he said, ''routinely escapes presidential and legislative surveillance and remains fairly immune from public scrutiny.'' U.S. to Support Loans Such moves have earned the Philippines a passing mark from the Reagan Administration, which recently announced that it would support badly needed loans to the Philippines from development institutions such as the World Bank."
