"A New York-based human rights organization has started a campaign to have the Khmer Rouge tried for genocide before the International Court of Justice. The Khmer Rouge rule of Cambodia from 1975 to 1979 is blamed for more than a million deaths. The rights group, the Cambodia Documentation Commission, said last week that it believed it had assembled evidence to prove the Khmer Rouge actions were genocide as defined by the 1948 Genocide Convention drafted by the United Nations. The commission estimated that the Khmer Rouge had caused two to three million deaths. The commission's director said the group hoped to gain recognition for the Cambodians' suffering and put pressure on the Cambodian guerrilla coalition fighting the Vietnamese-backed Government to eject and punish Khmer Rouge factions. The case would mark the first ever considered by the World Court under the convention, which obligates governments to punish genocide offenders. Called 'Ongoing Violation' ''The United Nations has never recognized the Khmer Rouge human rights violations, and the Cambodians want recognition for this terrible tragedy,'' said the director, David Hawk. ''Those who were primarily responsible for perpretrating those acts remain active in international and Cambodian life,'' he said. ''This is an ongoing violation of the articles of the convention that require those who commit genocide to be punished.'' Two hundred Cambodian survivors of Khmer Rouge camps, as well as survivors of genocide campaigns in other parts of the world, attended a news conference at the New York Public Library on Tuesday announcing the campaign. Members of the commission include Representative Stephan J. Solarz, Democrat of Brookyln; Max M. Kampelman, the Reagan Administration's arms negotiator; the Nazi-hunter Simon Wiesenthal, and Dith Pran, the New York Times photographer whose experiences in Cambodia were portrayed in the movie ''The Killing Fields.'' Under the 1948 convention, only governments can bring a genocide complaint before the World Court, and the commission this week sent letters to 70 heads of state asking them to consider pressing the case. The convention defines genocide as ''acts committed with intent to destroy in whole, or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group, as such.'' It requires signers to punish those the Court or relevant United Nations bodies find have committed genocide. U.N. Recognizes Coalition If the World Court decides against the Khmer Rouge, it could also rule against the Cambodian guerrilla coalition for not punishing Khmer Rouge offenders, Mr. Hawk said. A Vietnamese-backed Government has ruled most of Cambodia since Vietnam's invasion in 1979, but the United Nations recognizes a Cambodian coalition government that includes the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge, democratic factions and groups loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk. There is no precedent for enforcing the convention, but the commission believes the case would bring diplomatic pressure on the Cambodian coalition to ''get those most responsible for genocide out of their current positions, and out of the jurisdiction of democratic Kampuchea,'' Mr. Hawk said. A letter sent to President Reagan stressed that the group did not support the Vietnamese occupation or seek to weaken opposition to it. While the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, as the treaty is known, was signed by the United States, the Senate refused to approve it until October of last year for fear it was poorly drafted and might allow other governments to intervene in United States affairs. BANGKOK, Thailand, April 12 -Controversy still surrounds the human toll the Khmer Rouge took during its years in power. David P. Chandler, an American scholar of Cambodia now at Monash University in Australia, said in an interview last week that most of his colleagues settled on ''about a million -up to a million and a half - regime-related deaths.'' Research by Ben Kiernan, a colleague of Mr. Chandler's and the author of ''How Pol Pot Came to Power'' provides similar figures. Michael Vickery, who wrote the first standard contemporary history of the period, ''Cambodia: 1975-1982,'' accepts a slightly lower figure. Stephen R. Heder, a Khmer-speaking historian of Cambodia who is now on the Amnesty International staff in London, has in the past been quoted as accepting a figure of about 1 million to 1.5 million ''policy-related'' deaths, among them at least 100,000 executions. Speaking by telephone from Australia, Mr. Chandler, who is completing a history of Cambodia since 1945, acknowledged that other figures had been given, ranging from hundreds of thousands to three million, but he said they often reflect political viewpoints. He said he believed that the Vietnamese had overestimated the toll, while Thailand, which supports the Khmer Rouge in exile, had sought to underestimate it. Statistics on Cambodia's population in 1975 and now are considered unreliable by most experts. But Mr. Chandler said arguments over numbers were not the issue. ''The important thing,'' he said ''is that Pol Pot was absolutely awful.''"
