"A car bomb went off in the port of Batticaloa today, killing at least seven people. A Tamil group in India said later, in a report that could not be confirmed here, that soldiers shot and killed 47 civilians in reprisal. Batticaloa, 136 miles northeast of Colombo, has been the scene of a military offensive by the Government against guerrillas who seek an independent country for the minority Tamils. The Government said in a statement that seven people were killed by the car bomb. Other reports gave higher figures but could not be confirmed. There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the blast, but the Government statement accused Tamil militants of placing the bomb. A military source, speaking on condition that he not be identified, said that six people were killed outright by the blast, which he said took place outside a bus station, and that four were electrocuted by an cable torn loose in the explosion. The source also said that five policemen, who had been traveling back to their camp, were wounded. The news agency United News of India quoted officials in Colombo as saying the explosion killed 15 people, including 10 security personnel. Report of a Rampage The Tamil Information Center in Madura, India, said Government troops went on a rampage after the bombing, killing at least 47 civilians at point-blank range with automatic rifles. Its report could not be confirmed and no further information was available. Tamils, most of whom are Hindus, make up 18 percent of the Sri Lankan population of 16 million. They say they are discriminated against by the Sinhalese majority, which is predominantly Buddhist. Militants Tamils have been waging a guerrilla war for an independent homeland in the northern and eastern parts of the country for the last three years. The main Tamil political party, the Tamil United Liberation Front, said in a statement from its exile headquarters in southern India that Government helicopters had been strafing the Tamil-dominated civilian areas in the Batticaloa region. Residents of Batticaloa and independent sources say that more than 15,000 villagers have been forced to flee because of the 10-day-old offensive against suspected rebel hideouts. The international human rights group Amnesty International reported last week that there were widespread human rights violations in Sri Lanka. It said hundreds of people arrested by security forces had disappeared and some had been tortured and killed."
