"To the Editor: Having just returned from a two-week travel seminar in South Korea, I think it is imperative to challenge the statement of Marlin Fitzwater, White House spokesman, that South Korea has had ''great economic success'' (''U.S. Will Drop 4 Areas in Asia From Trade Aid,'' front page, Jan. 30). You point out there are many American companies with factories in South Korea, but do not mention that the working conditions are deplorable. Those who work for labor reform, for example those who try to organize strikes, those who demand higher wages and shorter hours, are imprisoned and tortured. Many die. It is not uncommon to see posters that say, ''Torture Is Not an Olympic Event.'' The very act of hanging such a poster is considered subversive. The majority of Koreans live in abject poverty. In the absence of environmental protection laws, the industrial pollution is horrific. South Korean workers are slave laborers in a market of international exploitation. In ''South Korea Chief Says He Never Sought Power'' (news article, Jan. 30), you note that President Chun Doo Hwan ''left unsaid'' that he agreed to the ''election'' of Dec. 16 only after the protests of last summer and that President-elect Roh Tae Woo did not win an overwhelming victory, but only 36.6 percent of the vote. However, you fail to mention the widespread election fraud. Though journalists were quick to quote from the speech of the opposition candidate Kim Dae Jung in which he apologized to the people for not joining forces with the other major opposition candidate, Kim Young Sam, none mentioned that the majority of the speech addressed documented accounts of election fraud. Many people who worked as election watchers still remain in prison. Coal miners in the city of Taebeck told us that if they did not register and vote for the ruling party they would lose their jobs. This is not an idle threat: the security police guard the exhausted mine workers at all times. Many election observers were beaten, ballot boxes were exchanged, and votes were bought. The people of Korea do not accept the Dec. 16 event as an election, but they see it as still another show of military force supported by the United States Government. The people are angry that the American Government and American journalists were the first to say that this was an honest election. The plight of the Korean people is desperate. Rather than perpetuating myths about economic miracles and glossing over human rights violations, you should report the South Korean situation and American involvement in it. KATHARINE T. BAKER-CARR   New Haven, Feb. 2, 1988 The writer is a student at Yale University's School of Divinity."
