"The Government of Sri Lanka will no longer bar international human rights organizations from visiting the country, Colombo's new Foreign Minister said Saturday. Over the last five years of ethnic strife that led to charges of abuses by Sri Lankan security forces, Amnesty International has twice been refused permission to send individuals to gather information. Other human rights groups have sent delegations without seeking formal permission. In an interview outlining Sri Lankan foreign policy under a new administration, Foreign Minister Ranjan Wijeratne said: ''Anybody can come here. Anybody can go to any part of this country. I'd be only too glad to help them get the information they want.'' He said the openness here would be matched by strengthened information services at embassies abroad. Draft Treaty Sent to New Delhi In the interview, Mr. Wijeratne, who also serves as Minister of State for Defense, also described plans to put relations with India, which has about 50,000 peacekeeping troops in this country, on a more equal footing through a treaty of friendship. This would be the first such accord sought by a neighbor of India, whose sheer size is matched by its military might as the regional power. A draft treaty was sent to New Delhi a few days ago, he said. India's military presence here, along with promises it extracted from Sri Lanka in 1987 restricting the use of Trincomalee harbor and of foreign broadcasting installations here, are politically unpopular. The new President, Ranasinghe Premadasa, who opposed the 1987 accord, pledged to replace it with a pact ''between two sovereign nations'' that would not leave all the concessions on this side. Mr. Wijeratne said Colombo would not yet ask Indian troops to leave. First, he said, a recently elected council for the new Tamil-dominated Northeastern Province would ''have to be given teeth.'' ''Once we are satisfied that the chief minister of that province is able to cope with the law and order situation,'' Mr. Wijeratne said, then we will tell the Indians: You may leave. Thank you very much."
