"Their heads shaved and bowed and their hands tied to a thick rope, about a dozen barefoot young men walked sullenly into the shabby, cavernous township jail. A man who lives nearby watched the parade. ""This is where they bring a lot of political prisoners,"" he said, suggesting that the forlorn group had been detained for their politics rather than for common crimes. The onlooker, who has close contacts in the military, spoke in a matter-of-fact tone, as if he were describing something as normal as the weather. The scene was unremarkable in Myanmar, formerly Burma, where the military Government has recently ordered a wave of new arrests in response to a rise in opposition activities. While a trend toward freedom and liberalization sweeps other parts of the world, Myanmar remains under a repressive military Government. This country, rich in gems, forests and vast fertile plains, used to be called the ricebowl of Asia. But after decades of repression and mismanagement, Myanmar is a country where economic development has been frozen in time. Hopes Dashed After Election Six months ago, the Government raised the nation's hopes for change by holding nationwide elections for a new National Assembly. It was the first multiparty election held in Myanmar in three decades, and it emboldened many to think that the country would begin to move forward economically and politically. Hopes soared when the election proved free enough that the opposition party, the National League for Democracy, won a resounding victory. But the military leaders, instead of handing over power to those who won the election, imprisoned many of them. Now, the military says it will transfer power to a civilian Government only after a new constitution is drafted and approved by a plebiscite and by the army. The army says that all opposition parties have agreed in writing to this new procedure, but it has not announced when discussions on the new constitution will begin. Diplomats say the process could take two to five years. Myanmar's traumas have received little attention, partly because the Government rarely permits journalists to enter. But a 12-day visit suggested that discontent is festering and repression has become the means of governing. Most people seem to have little hope that life will get better. Promise Not to Discuss Politics ""Our country is very poor, the people are poor and the Government has let everything run down,"" a young Burmese man said as he pounded his fist on the railing of the ramshackle porch where he was standing. ""We don't like the Government because it just squeezes the people."" Government employees are still forced to sign a promise not to discuss politics, and many departments require employees to report the name and address of every foreigner with whom they speak, as well as the contents of the conversation. Fear of informers is everywhere, even hampering discussions within families. ""My wife works for the Government, and so we never discuss politics with each other,"" said a young Burmese vendor who was forced out of his Government job because of his role in nationwide demonstrations in 1988. ""She's too afraid of what will happen if she gets caught."" When someone is jailed, he normally has no contact with his family until he is released, alive or dead. Maung Ko, a leader of the National League for Democracy, was arrested in October, and the next news about him came on Nov. 10 when the police summoned his family to identify his body, which was badly bruised. Doubts About Cause of Death The police said he had committed suicide, but suicide is extremely rare in this Buddhist country because it is believed to be punishable by suffering 505 more lives and deaths by suicide. His family has told friends they believe he was killed. The armed forces have controlled Myanmar since 1962, when Gen. Ne Win led a coup and launched a program called the Burmese Way to Socialism. Student-led anti-Government demonstrations in 1962, 1974 and 1988 have all ended in a hail of military gunfire. Many Burmese and diplomats based in Yangon, formerly Rangoon, say the current Government, nominally led by Gen. Saw Maung but with Ne Win looming behind the scenes, could remain in control for several more years. The Government, which has exercised martial law for the last two years, has muzzled, if not already arrested, the nation's dissidents, including students, monks and opposition party members. Diplomats say hundreds of dissidents have been arrested since the last military crackdown in September 1988, and a recent report by Amnesty International suggests that the number may be more than 3,000. Change Through Military Unlikely With the underground movement effectively paralyzed, and with opposition parties no longer even allowed to publish and distribute pamphlets, many Burmese say that political change will have to be initiated by the military itself. They add that as long as it feels its power is threatened, the Government is unlikely to hand over legal authority. But for a people who have endured decades, even centuries, of authoritarian rule, there is still a lingering hope. ""There is no desperation, yet,"" said a Burmese intellectual. ""We still hope that the military will transfer power. In America, you want to be rich, to do more than survive. But in Burma, survival is the key. We have lived under these conditions for a long time."" Many people say a victory by a revived popular movement is only a remote possibility because the society is riddled with informers. Many of the opposition leaders who were elected are now in jail. Six of the 10 top leaders of the National League for Democracy, which the won by a landslide at the polls, are detained, including the League's chairman, U Tin Oo, and its charismatic symbol, Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, whose father led the country toward independence. She has been under house arrest since July 1989. Campaign Against Monks In its most recent effort to stamp out dissent, the Government launched a campaign to defrock and arrest monks it said were illegally engaged in politics, and in recent weeks the Government arrested about 200 of them, diplomats in Yangon said. Most of the reported arrests were in Mandalay. During visits to Mandalay, Pagan and Taunggyi, there was little sign of unrest but many people spoke quietly of their cynicism about the Government and their yearning for democratic change. ""I used to fight with my father every night, for he wanted socialism and I didn't,"" said a Burmese university graduate. ""Now he agrees with me, but we don't talk about politics anymore. We are all afraid. Some students say they are willing to die to bring democracy to the motherland. I am not willing to die for my country, but I think we can someday achieve it."" At times in the last two years, real change seemed possible. The Government has had moments of relaxation, if only to reduce international criticism of its human rights record and thereby encourage foreign investment to boost its deteriorating economy. The Government has allowed 10 foreign companies to explore for oil in the past year. Border trade with China and Thailand has increased. The Government also received a United Nations human rights specialist earlier this month, although her official visit was highly restricted and she had virtually no opportunity to meet informally with ordinary people. 'A Forgiving People' But this remains a poor country. A majority of Myanmar's people are farmers who grow rice and other crops in the countryside, and fewer than 20 percent of children ever complete primary school, according to research by Unicef. ""We are an uneducated people, and most of us want to be left alone,"" said a Burmese businessman. ""As long as the people can eat, they will be happy. Our people's nature is tolerant. We are a forgiving people."" Yangon-based diplomats and Burmese throughout the country's major cities say it is not clear that democratic change would immediately lead to peace and prosperity in Myanmar. The military is the only effective, highly organized institution in the country, and some fear that even if the opposition party did assume power now, there could be a period of instability. Ironically, the Government will not allow the nation to forget the 1988 demonstrations. Instead, it has been publishing a detailed serial account of the movement in the country's only national newpaper, the Working People's Daily. Throughout Myanmar, it has placed red signs emblazoned with the Government's slogans, and universities have remained closed for more than two years now. In Yangon, parks have been fenced in where demonstrators once marched freely across the grounds, and around the Ministry of Defense, the Government has erected a thick red brick wall with holes at regular intervals, placed so that a rifle pointed outward can pivot in a semi-circle."
