"The human rights organization Amnesty International charged yesterday that thousands of political prisoners in Cambodia were victims of arbitrary arrest, the widespread use of torture and ''cruel and inhuman'' prison conditions. Issuing a detailed report on human rights abuses in Cambodia, Amnesty International urged the governments of Cambodia and its ally Vietnam to end current violations and prevent them in the future. At the start of a worldwide campaign to denounce continued ill-treatment of Cambodians, Curt Goering, the deputy director of Amnesty International U.S.A., said at a news conference in Manhattan that copies of the human rights report had been sent to the governments of Phnom Penh and Hanoi but that there had been no reply. The Amnesty International report also cites and denounces abuses by parties in the opposition Cambodian coalition, which includes fighters of the former Khmer Rouge Government and was until recently led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk. But the main focus of the current campaign, according to Mr. Goering, is violations committed by the Phnom Penh Government, which controls most of the country, and its Vietnamese advisers. 'Several Thousand' Held Estrellita Jones, Amnesty International's Washington-based coordinator for Asian affairs, refused to compare the current human rights abuses in Cambodia with the violations under the former ruler, Pol Pot, and his Khmer Rouge. She noted earlier reports denouncing the former administration for pratices resulting in the death of ''between one and two million'' of Cambodia's seven or eight million citizens. Total figures for the current number of political prisoners are not available, according to Ms. Jones. But she said there were estimates of ''several thousand'' who have been held without charge or trial and ''many do not survive the ordeal.'' Amnesty International has compiled the names of more than 400 political prisoners believed to be held as of early this year, when the 90-page report was being drafted. Use of Torture Reported Of these prisoners, Amnesty has detailed information on more than 100, with nearly half of them reportedly confined for at least seven years. The political prisoners are mostly men, ranging in age from early 20's through 70. A third of them were members of the Cambodian local administration or militia before detention; others were factory workers, fishermen or tradesmen. There are also reports of students, teachers and Buddhist monks in detention. Amnesty has received information on 46 deaths in Cambodian prisons between 1979 and 1985, according to the report. Twelve of these deaths, the report said, occurred during or soon after interrogations in which torture was used."
