"To the Editor:  The spirited defense (letter, Dec. 19) of human-rights conditions in Kampuchea, formerly Cambodia, by members of a National Lawyers Guild delegation to that country does considerably less than justice to the report of the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights summarizing our recent fact-finding mission to that area. Worse yet, it reflects a disturbingly politicized basis for assessing human-rights abuses. The conclusions of our mission were that the rule of law was not respected in any serious sense in Kampuchea, that beatings of political prisoners were commonplace and more sophisticated forms of torture usual, and that from arrest to imprisonment there was virtually a complete absence of legal process for political prisoners. Those conclusions were not based, as the National Lawyers Guild delegation suggests, on material provided us by the remnants of the Pol Pot regime, but by extensive interviews with persons who recently fled from the different areas in Kampuchea to Thailand and to areas of Kampuchea near the Thai border not controlled by the Khmer Rouge. It is true that we did not visit Kampuchea itself. Despite repeated requests over several months, that Government did not grant us visas to visit areas under its control. Nonetheless, the number of people we interviewed, the breadth of those interviews and the internal consistency of the information we learned from refugees and others persuaded us of the validity of our conclusions. The human-rights community has failed before with respect to Cambodia. There was silence in the mid- 1970's during the mass murders by the Khmer Rouge, savagery on a scale rarely witnessed in the history of mankind.  There has been silence since the invasion of that country by Vietnam with respect to violations of human rights, violations that pale before the sickening brutalities of Pol Pot's rule, but are nonetheless all too real and well worthy of condemnation by all who genuinely care about human rights.  It is long past time for the silence to end. FLOYD ABRAMS New York, Dec. 19, 1984"
