"Under intense pressure from his critics, former President Chun Doo Hwan was reported today to be ready to apologize for abuses during his administration, retire from the capital and return money he is said to have stolen from the Government. The steps he was said to be planning conformed generally with the formula urged by his successor, President Roh Tae Woo, as a way to avoid criminal investigation into reported corruption and human rights abuses. The reports in early editions of Saturday newspapers and on the state radio, attributed to people close to both Mr. Chun and Mr. Roh, followed a series of maneuvers by the former President and by critics, who seek to bring him to account after his eight years of military rule. A number of previous predictions in the tense political standoff, based on similar reports, have not proved accurate. The new reports said Mr. Chun's apology might come at a news conference at the start of next week. In addition, he was reported to be prepared to return millions of dollars he is said to have embezzled from the Government or extorted from businessmen. The reports said Mr. Chun was also ready to go into exile from Seoul. He is being urged to return to his home region in southern South Korea or even to leave the country. The reports come as pressure on Mr. Chun has increased, with street demonstrations demanding his imprisonment and daylong televised hearings into the abuses of his administration. Mr. Roh, a former deputy to Mr. Chun, has refused his predecessor's request for a meeting that might soften his humiliation, reportedly speaking with him only briefly by telephone. Aides have conducted negotiations.  The former President was reported to have backed away from an implied threat, expressed by an aide, to make disclosures about illegal disbursements of embezzled funds that could have implicated both Mr. Roh and the leaders of opposition parties. He has reportedly requested, but not received, a guarantee of immunity from prosecution if he followed the steps urged by the Government. The Korean Broadcasting System quoted unidentified ''informed sources'' today as saying Mr. Roh might grant a pardon if Mr. Chun took the steps. Both Mr. Roh's governing party and the opposition parties that control the National Assembly appear to hope to avoid legal procedures and the possible jailing of the former President. But many dissidents and the powerful student groups that lead street protests appear bent on retribution. Eleven relatives of Mr. Chun and his wife, Lee Soon Ja, are in custody. The pressure on Mr. Chun grew at a televised hearing that lasted throughout the day today, focusing on Government suppression of a popular uprising in Kwangju in 1980. In the uprising, described by Mr. Chun's critics as a pretext for his full seizure of power after his 1979 military coup, the Government said 200 civilians were killed, but the opposition put the toll at over 1,000. Testifying before the hearing at the National Assembly, Kim Dae Jung, the leader of the largest opposition party, said he was certain that Mr. Chun himself had given the order for the killings. Mr. Chun has previously denied this.  He refused a summons to testify at the hearing, and opposition leaders said they would seek to subpoena him."
