"The Reagan Administration voiced support today for China's position in the unrest in Tibet, while the Senate voted without dissent to condemn China for its recent crackdown there. Anti-Chinese demonstrations in Tibet have turned violent in recent days, with more than 14 people reported killed in one clash on Thursday. The protests were renewed today as about 60 people marched to a Government office in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital, where armed Chinese security forces quickly arrested them. [Page A8.] The divergent positions taken by the Administration and Congress on the events in Tibet reflect contrasting interests. The Administration is reluctant to take positions that might damage Chinese-American relations. But the 98-to-0 vote by the Senate today highlights Congressional concern over reports of human rights violations in Tibet, which China took over in 1950. State Department Assails Vote The vote is certain to be protested by China as an example of American interference. State Department officials today voiced strong opposition to the Senate action. The measure, an amendment to the State Department authorization bill, also urged President Reagan to meet with the Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled Buddhist leader. In addition, it would require Mr. Reagan to certify that China is making progress on resolving human rights issues in Tibet before the United Stats proceeds with any new sales of arms or weapons technology to China. The amendment does not call for economic sanctions against China, and a provision that would have required the United States to ''reassess and review'' arms sales because of China's actions in Tibet was deleted. 'Almost Certain Damage' to Ties One State Department official said that any possible benefits of the Senate action for the Tibetan people were ''insufficient to outweigh the almost certain damage to the U.S.-China bilateral relationship.'' The United States has supported China's stated efforts in recent years to make amends in Tibet after two decades of repression. In recent days, the State Department has reaffirmed the American position that Tibet is part of China and that the Dalai Lama is a religious leader, not the head of a government in exile. The United States has recognized China's sovereignty over Tibet since the 1940's, and has held since 1978 that Tibet is a part of China. The Dalai Lama, who is both the spiritual and temporal leader of Tibetan Buddhists, fled Tibet in 1959 after Chinese troops crushed an uprising. He is now based in Dharmsala, India, although he periodically visits other countries. His visit to the United States late last month and his testimony before Congressional panels was cited by Beijing as an interference in Chinese affairs. Although the United States has often protested human rights abuses since the United States and China formally established embassies in each other's capitals in 1979, it has taken great care not to offend Chinese sensibilities. Upbeat State Department Report In a 24-page report to Congress Oct. 1 on the treatment of minorities in China, written before the recent outbreak of violence, the State Department took a generally upbeat tone on Tibet. The report said that, since 1980, the Chinese Government had made a conscious effort to ease tensions and begin economic and other changes. ''Beijing has stressed its commitment to preserve Tibet's unique cultural, linguistic and religious traditions,'' the report concluded, in an effort to ''strengthen social stability.'' Today's Senate action challenges that assertion and calls for the State Department to present an updated human rights report in 60 days. The amendment accuses Chinese authorities of executing two Tibetans after the Dalai Lama testified before Congress last month. It also blames the Chinese police for violent clashes with demonstrators on Sept. 27 and for killing at least six Tibetans and wounding many others when they opened fire on unarmed demonstrators Thursday. Population Transfer Charged The Senate also charged that China has moved to transfer millions of Chinese into Tibet in an effort to ''make the Tibetan people a minority in their own homeland.'' One State Department official characterized the Senate portrayal of developments in Tibet as ''inaccurate, incomplete and misleading.'' Reiterating a position first articulated after a similar amendment was passed by the House last June, the official faulted the Senate for failing to acknowledge ''significant changes'' in China's policies that, he said, have led to an improvement of human rights conditions in Tibet. The Senate amendment is expected to be considered by the House after the Senate passes the State Department authorization bill, which then goes to the President for his signature. Dalai Lama Peace Plan The State Department also takes issue with assertions of large Chinese population transfers into Tibet, accepting the Chinese claim that the number of Chinese civilians there has actually declined since 1980. The Reagan Administration is also unhappy with support on Capitol Hill for a five-point ''peace zone'' proposal made by the Dalai Lama to Congressional leaders during his little-publicized visit to Washington last month. The proposal calls for the withdrawal of Chinese troops from Tibet, an end to China's population-transfer policy and negotiations on the future of Tibet. In a Sept. 22 letter to Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang of China, Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, and House Democratic and Republican leaders endorsed the proposal of the Dalai Lama as a ''historic step towards resolving the important question of Tibet and alleviating the suffering of the Tibetan people.'' Mr. Pell is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Although the Reagan Administration did not comment on the proposal at the time, one State Department official today characterized it as ''a veiled independence plan.'' He added, ''At this particular time, Congressional support for Tibetan independence sends the wrong signal to more-violent elements and could lead to more bloodshed.'' Plan Linked to Unrest News of the Dalai Lama's proposal was widely disseminated in Tibet and is believed to have contributed to the atmosphere of unrest. So sensitive was his visit to the United States that Chinese authorities protested to the State Department and the American Embassy in Beijing even before his arrival and again after he announced his proposal. Although the Dalai Lama did not request a meeting with President Reagan during his visit, State Department officials said that any request for a meeting with officials of the executive branch would have been denied because it might have given China the impression that the United States supported his political claims."
