"President Bush today strongly defended his decision to send two senior aides to Beijing last weekend, rejecting criticism that he has forgiven Chinese leaders for the killing of democracy demonstrators there in June. Mr. Bush's comments came as lawmakers and independent experts on China stepped up their condemnations of the surprise high-level visit as proof of the Bush Administration's willingness to sacrifice democracy and human rights in return for the normalization of relations with China. The Senate majority leader, George J. Mitchell, condemned the American overture as ''embarrassing kowtowing to the Chinese Government.'' He added, ''These actions make a mockery of our profession of concern for human rights and our inconsistent with our stated ideals.'' The Democratic Senator from Maine also said that he will lead efforts to override Mr. Bush's Nov. 30 veto of legislation to permit any Chinese student fearful of reprisal at home to remain in the United States beyond his visa's expiration. Assurances on Missiles It was the first high-level American visit to Beijing since President Bush banned such contacts after the military crackdown. In defending his decision to send his national security adviser, Brent Scowcroft, and Deputy Secretary of State Lawrence S. Eagleburger to the Chinese capital, Mr. Bush said that Mr. Scowcroft won assurances from the Chinese that they would not sell missiles in the Middle East, and praised an announcement in the Chinese press to that effect as ''a very sound development.'' What Mr. Bush did not say was that there was no urgency on this issue since the missile, the M-9, is still under development, or that he had received the same assurances during a trip to China last February. Mr. Bush, a former United States envoy to China who had previously said that Beijing must make the first move to improve relations, acknowledged to a group of editors that China has not apologized for the crackdown. But, he said, ''I don't want to see that China remains totally isolated.'' Mr. Bush said that relations with Beijing remain strained, but added, ''I don't want to make it any worse.'' The President also noted that the United States deals with a number of countries which violate human rights, suggesting that China should not be the exception. ''We have contact with countries that have egregious records on human rights, so I am going to keep looking for ways to find common ground,'' he said. Need to Brief Beijing Is Cited Mr. Bush argued that the visit did not constitute a normalization of relations with China and criticized those who said so as people who ''simply do not know what they are talking about.'' He said that he planned no further sanctions against Beijing for its campaign of repression, which did not end with the crackdown on student demonstators last June but continues with executions and arrests of workers and students who participated in the democracy demonstrations. Mr. Bush sought to justify the visit as a way to brief Chinese leaders on the results of the Malta summit talks. But the high-level nature of the briefing struck China experts as rather unusual. China was briefed on a higher level than some of the closest allies of the United States, including Australia and South Korea. The President's remarks came amid criticism that the visit illustrates a continuing double standard in the Administration's approach to human rights. ''We don't expect the Chinese to be democratic and we don't hold them to the same standards that we hold the Soviets or the East Europeans,'' said Merle Goldman, professor of Chinese history at Boston University. Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn and chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on East Asia and the Pacific, said: ''We have to ask ourselves what our reaction would be if Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev were to unleash ther Red Army on demonstrators in Red Square. In such circumstances the President would hardly send his national security adviser to Moscow.'' Rejects Charges on Killing Although Administration officials had discussed ways to brief the Chinese for some time, Mr. Bush made his final decision only last Thursday, cutting short a visit to Washington last week by James Lilley, the United States Ambassador to Beijing, senior Adminsitration officials said. The delegation was dispatched in secrecy to Beijing on Friday. In other remarks, Mr. Bush denied charges that agents of the Federal Bureau of Investigation had mistreated a potential witness to the killing in El Sal vador of six Jesuit priests. He said that he had investigated claims by Salvadoran Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas that American officials had tried to brainwash the witness, Lucia Barrera de Cerna, a Salvadoran housekeeper, to discourage the investigation of the crime. ''I have confidence that our attorney general would not permit the kind of inquisition process that was alluded to,'' Mr. Bush said. Mr. Bush also said he hoped to attend a February drug summit meeting with South American leaders in Cartagena, Colombia, despite security agency fears he could be a target of the drug cartels."
