"In a rare glimpse into North Korea, two human-rights organizations have issued a report describing a society marred by extensive human-rights abuses and deadened by regimentation. The report, compiled by the two groups, Asia Watch and the Minnesota Lawyers International Human Rights Committee, includes these vignettes of life in one of the world's most closed societies: * A North Korean spy decides to defect when he discovers that he too is being spied on, through a bug in his Government-issued Mercedes-Benz. * A North Korean official who tells a friend that a North Korean sports team lost a game in the 1976 Montreal Olympics disappears the next day and is sent to a remote factory. * A typical day for a North Korean woman begins at 5:30 A.M. when she rises before her family to prepare food, then stretches past midnight as she works at a full-time job, spends two hours in political study groups, and begins her housekeeping at 11 P.M. Official Calls Report 'Lies' The report relies on interviews with former residents of North Korea, tourists, defectors, and published accounts in a range of foreign languages because North Korea would not allow researchers to enter the country, which is sealed off from most non-Communist visitors. The report draws a portrait of a rigidly stratified society in which all people are judged by their loyalty to the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung. It indicates that any opposition, however mild, brings reprisals that range from forced labor to long imprisonment to torture. And all recreational and cultural activities center around a Kim Il Sung personality cult, the report says. In a letter sent to the groups after reviewing the draft report, Pak Gil Yon, North Korea's representative to the United Nations, where the country has permanent observer status, condemned the report as ''full of lies and fabrications defaming our country.'' The report says all North Koreans are unofficially divided into at least three groups, which determine where they live, their housing, food rations, clothing, degree of medical care, luxuries like appliances or travel, and how they are treated if they commit crimes. The most privileged people, who are allowed to live in Pyongyang, North Korea's modern and clean showcase city, belong to the ''core'' who are perceived to unswervingly support the state. They include high party officials, diplomats, and other professionals. #51 Sub-Categories of Status The second tier is the ''wavering'' or ''uncertain'' group tarnished by suspect backgrounds, like merchants. They may be assigned to live in less desirable cities outside Pyongyang, receiving fewer food rations and a restricted income. The most unfortunate are classed as a ''hostile'' group of those who opposed the Government or who come from class backgrounds condemned by the state, like former capitalists or religious leaders. While North Koreans know whether they belong to one of those general groups, they do not know exactly where they fit into one of as many as 51 sub-categories, precisely assessing their reliability and status in the state. The report condemns North Korea for several specific violations of international human-rights accords the country has signed. According to the report, North Korea has built an extensive surveillance network of agents and informers that reaches into every workplace and residential community. With no effective independent judiciary, a powerful Public Security Ministry decides who will be arrested and imprisoned, either by fiat or through trials in which defense attorneys are expected to persuade their clients to plead guilty. Newspapers, radios and television stations offer news only about Kim Il Sung and his son and heir apparent, Kim Jong Il, their ideology and achievements, and accounts about visitors from Communist and third-world nations. North Korean radios are designed so that listeners can tune in only to Government stations. North Koreans usually need Government approval before they can marry, the report says, and premarital sex is harshly punished. The state supervises the rearing and education of children, whose admittance to secondary school often hinges on their class background."
