"A Japanese professor of international relations and expert on human rights was nominated today to take charge of the world's 15 million refugees, at a time when the relief agency she is to head faces a severe financial crisis. The United Nations Secretary General named Sadako Ogata, who teaches at Sophia University in Tokyo, to be the next United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, replacing Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway. Mr. Stoltenberg resigned in October after 10 months to become Foreign Minister in the new Norwegian Government of Prime Minister Gro Harlem Bruntland. Diplomats say Japan had indicated it would try to increase its contribution to the refugee agency if Mrs. Ogata was chosen against rivals from Norway, Italy, Canada and elsewhere. Although the world's refugees have doubled in number over the last decade, the agency's budget has remained frozen at around $500 million a year after adjustment for inflation. As a result the aid it gives to individual refugees has fallen by half. Last year Japan was the second largest contributor to the agency, after the United States. The agency is financed entirely by voluntary contributions. The choice of Mrs. Ogata, who is 63 years old, appears to be popular with the aid-giving countries that finance the agency as well as with the mainly developing countries that are host to most of the world's refugees. The General Assembly is expected to unanimously approve her nomination on Friday. Mrs. Ogata holds degrees from George Washington University and the University of California at Berkeley. Her selection brings to an end a difficult search that was marred by a quarrel between the United States and the Secretary General over the latter's attempt to give the post to his Indian chief of staff, Virendra Dayal. That ended with Mr. Dayal's withdrawal. Mrs. Ogata served as a senior member of Japan's delegation to the United Nations from 1976 to 1979. She has also been chairwoman of the United Nations Children's Fund Executive Board and has served as Japan's representative on the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva, which this year sent her to investigate human-rights abuses in Myanmar, formerly Burma."
