"To the Editor: T. Ramakrishnan, like other members of the Tamil separatist-terrorist movement, has vilified Sri Lanka with a heavy dose of disinformation (letter, April 22). This is part of an ongoing effort to distort news, primarily to win sympathy for their cause in the West, and urge cuts in aid to Sri Lanka. In his attempt to justify demands for a separate region, Mr. Rama-krishnan has rewritten the history of Sri Lanka. What he fails to understand is that the concept of a nation-state is an idea that evolved in the last century. Using Western concepts to promote the idea that a Tamil kingdom once existed does not resolve the situation. He laments the ''genocide'' in Sri Lanka but fails to recognize that the Tamil terrorists (the Tigers), reportedly trained by Libyan and certain P.L.O. groups, are responsible for the acts of violence committed on innocent civilians, the latest being the Air Lanka disaster May 3 at the Colombo Airport. Any action taken by the Sri Lankan Government has been a measured response to terrorist activities. Any excesses committed by the armed forces have been dealt with by the Government. Sri Lanka, which became independent on Feb. 4, 1948, is a multi-racial, multi-religious country where all citizens enjoy civil and human rights, including the right to live in any part of the country and to pursue happiness. The advocates of separatism, on the other hand, have systematically driven away the non-Tamils from the North and East. They are attempting to turn these regions into another South Africa. Mr. Ramakrishnan is correct that Tamils settled in the East, but he and his compatriots want to exclude non-Tamils and create a mono-ethnic region in the North and East. The Tamil separatist movement has struck fear and terror into the North. People suspected of not supporting the terrorist cause have been tied to lamp posts and shot. Moderate Tamils - like the former Mayor of Jaffna, Alfred Duraiappan - are assassinated. The reign of terror has succeeded in helping to create a wall of silence in the North. Army members were ambushed in July 1983 and not in 1982, as Mr. Ramakrishnan wrote. The army was present to protect the Tamils and stop the terrorist violence. Mr. Ramakrishnan has also referred to Roman Catholic priests being gunned down. This is a deliberate attempt by Tamil propaganda to muddy the waters. As a Catholic, I resent this attempt to involve the Sri Lanka Catholic Church in the issue. The actions of renegade, Marxist-oriented Tamil Catholic priests cannot be condoned. Though Sri Lanka is a Buddhist country, it treats all religions favorably. And the farm workers who he says were killed were in fact Tamil terrorists who drove away the Sinhalese farmers. The Government, in its attempt to regain control of the farm belt, has engaged in counter-terrorist activity. Consequently, lives have been lost on both sides. We Sri Lankan expatriates should devise a reasonable formula to ease the situation in Sri Lanka and restore peace and harmony in our former motherland. RANJIT C. SWARIS New York, May 6, 1986"
