"President Bush started off right when he invited Fang Lizhi to join 500 guests at the barbecue at which he was host in Beijing Sunday. That would have upheld America's values in much the same way Ronald Reagan did last spring when he ignored Moscow's objections and held a reception for Soviet dissenters. The invitation to Mr. Fang, China's best-known democratic dissident, seemed to prove that America's leaders understand that effective diplomacy doesn't require acquiescing to repression abroad. Yet Mr. Bush ended up doing just that when the Chinese turned ugly. Some 100 police officers repeatedly blocked Mr. Fang from reaching the Bush barbecue. Earlier, China's leaders lectured Mr. Bush on their distaste for hearing about American human rights concerns. Beijing now compounds the offense by laying all blame at Mr. Bush's door. The President is left looking all too receptive to Chinese bullying, avoiding human rights in his own remarks and then letting the Fang incident pass with only mild protest. That can only reinforce Beijing's belief that it benefits from a Western double standard. China has become an important strategic partner of the United States. Its economic reforms have been more rapid and thoroughgoing than anything yet seen in Mikhail Gorbachev's Soviet Union. But political reform lags seriously. And Washington keeps winking at blatant behavior that it would vigorously protest if it occurred in the Soviet Union or Cuba or Nicaragua. Deng Xiaoping himself reportedly invoked Western indifference to justify a major crackdown two years ago that crushed a student campaign for democratic rights. In the process, Mr. Fang, an astrophysicist, lost his job, party membership and right to travel abroad. Recalling the fate of a leader of the 1979 Democracy Wall movement, a directive attributed to Mr. Deng advised: ''Look at Wei Jingsheng. We put him behind bars and the democracy movement died. We haven't released him, but that did not raise much of an international uproar.'' Wei Jingsheng remains in prison. There are other notable examples of repression, like the cases of Liu Binyan, a crusading journalist, and Wang Ruowang, a poet, both stripped of position and influence in 1987. China has suppressed nationalist protests in Tibet. Just last week, official media attacked a petition drive seeking amnesty for political prisoners. Some leaders now advocate a ''new authoritarianism'' emulating the repressive practices of neighboring non-Communist states. As President of the United States, George Bush serves as a global spokesman for democracy's cause, a role he acknowledged in Japan. He seemed sensitive to it in South Korea, his final stop, where he met with opposition leaders. Sadly, where Mr. Bush failed this role was in China, where threatened democrats need support the most."
