"The first Philippine legislature of the post-Marcos era opened here today amid the chants of leftist protesters and the threat of a right-wing terrorist attack. ''This day completes the circle of our democratic achievement,'' President Corazon C. Aquino said in her address on the state of the nation before a joint session of the newly-elected congress. Mrs. Acquino dissolved the National Assembly in March 1986, and has ruled by decree until today. She urged the legislators to defend Philippine democracy from ''the slavery of the left'' and the ''fascist terror of the right'' and vowed ''to end all threats to democracy by the end of my term.'' Return to Democracy With the convening of congress, Mrs. Aquino ceased to exercise law-making powers she held since she became President in a popular uprising last year. The American-style congress is made up of 24 senators and 200 representatives, the great majority of whom belong to Mrs. Aquino's party. When he declared martial law in 1972, former President Ferdinand E. Marcos dissolved congress and years later, created a largely powerless parliament. The law-making body's opening today marks the Philippines' return to full representative democracy. ''Now Philippine democracy rests solidly upon three pillars of freedom -the President, supreme court and congress,'' Mrs. Aquino said. Her address also chided foreign creditors and asked the lawmakers for more money for the military in its fight against the insurgency. ''Let me put it bluntly,'' she said, ''Our extraordinary achievement in fulfilling the first requirement of debt renegotiation, the establishment of a free and responsible Government, gained us applause but no substantial accomodation from our foreign creditors.'' Crushing Extremists Mrs. Aquino also said that her Government had ''exhausted all avenues of negotiations'' with Communist and Moslem insurgents. She told congress that it had the obligation to provide the armed forces with the means to crush leftist and rightist extremists by the time her term ends in 1992. Shortly after the address, the military announced the arrest of a renegade colonel, Rolando Abadilla, believed to have been involved in plots to overthrow President Aquino's Government. Two thousand leftist protesters chanted slogans at the roadside as the legislators, foreign diplomats and Government officials drove past. Among the guests were three American Congressmen led by Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the House Foreign Relations subcommittee on East Asian and Pacific Affairs. Mr. Solarz is one of the House's most vocal supporters of the Aquino Government. This morning, the Senate and the House of Representatives, in separate sessions reaffirmed the election of Senator Jovito Salonga and Representative Ramon Mitra as Senate president and speaker, respectively. The new congress has more powers than previous legislatures. It is expected to set the initiative on crucial issues like land redistribution, the continued presence of American military bases here and the foreign debt policy."
