"Amnesty International urged the Indian Government today to investigate what it called increasingly credible reports that the Indian police have killed scores of Sikh militants in staged encounters. In a report on human rights violations in India in the last 18 months, the international human rights organization also complained that an investigation into allegations that the police massacred 80 Moslem villagers had been kept secret. Amnesty also said that it had received reports that dozens of prisoners had died in police custody across the country after being tortured. 'Official Failure' Amnesty attributed police excesses, arbitrary arrest and prolonged detention without trial to the removal of legal safeguards in security laws and ''official failure to clamp down on lawlessness by India's national and state security forces.'' ''Many victims were involved in violence themselves and have killed civilians and security personnel, notably in Punjab,'' Amnesty said in a statement accompanying the review. ''But action taken against them has transgressed international human rights standards.'' The report was sent to to Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India in June, but he did not reply, Amnesty said. Mr. Gandhi, who would not allow Amnesty International to visit the Sikh-dominated northern state of Punjab, has denied reports of torture by the police and security forces. 'Circumstantial Evidence' The report said Amnesty had been told by a Punjab civil rights group, which it did not identify, that security forces killed more than 70 Sikhs in fake or staged encounters between May 12 and Aug. 22 last year in the Amritsar district, where Sikh radicals are demanding a homeland. Amnesty said the group had reported that 50 Sikhs were killed in similar encounters in the Faridkot district of Punjab between May 12 and July 29. ''There certainly has been too great a pattern of 'encounter' killings over the years for it to be dismissed as the odd, isolated case,'' said an Amnesty International spokesman, Sean Stiles. The reports of killings ''have gained in credibility through circumstantial evidence,'' the report said. On the supposed massacre of 80 Moslems, Amnesty said a civil rights group claimed to have detailed evidence that policemen carried out the killings during Hindu-Moslem clashes in Uttar Pradesh in May 1987."
