"President Ferdinand E. Marcos today defended his record on human rights in the Philippines and termed ''ridiculous'' reports that he was an authoritarian and that he and his wife, Imelda, spent public funds lavishly while other Filipinos suffered in poverty. In appearances before two Congressional committees and the National Press Club, Mr. Marcos began a public relations campaign to quiet the criticism that has dogged him since he declared martial law in the Philippines 10 years ago. In an effort to demonstrate the democratic principles of his rule, Mr. Marcos introduced at every stop three men whom he described as former political opponents who are now working in his Government. He identified the men as Luis Taruc, a former rebel leader; Jeremias Montemayor, a political opponent, and Nilo Tayag, who once led a leftist youth movement. None of the men spoke, but other members of Mr. Marcos's entourage busily distributed Government pamphlets that described progress under President Marcos. Mr. Marcos, who arrived two days ago for his first visit here in 16 years, was greeted warmly on Thursday by President Reagan. But his visit has been opposed by some senators and representatives, and demonstrators chanting anti-Marcos slogans have picketed his appearances. This afternoon a coalition of anti-Marcos groups held a ''counterforum'' to rebut statements by the Philippine President. Frmer Senator Speaks Benigno S. Aquino Jr., a former Philippines Senator who spent seven years as a political prisoner of the Marcos Government, described Mr. Marcos as ''a tyrant destroying the civil liberties of the people.'' Mr. Aquino said that the external debt of the Philippines was over $18 billion, of which at least 10 percent ''has gone to line the pockets of the Marcos family and their cronies.'' Mr. Aquino also criticized the cost of the Marcoses' visit to the United States, which has been estimated at more than $5 million. He said that more than 700 people, including 200 members of the Philippines press, made the trip at Government expense, and that the Marcos Government paid Cambodians as well as Filipino-Americans to fill out crowds of pro-Marcos demonstrators here. Other opposition speakers talked of continuing repression and human rights abuses by the Marcos Government. Bonifacio H. Gillego, representing the Movement for a Free Philippines, said that although Mr. Marcos lifted martial law last year, he continued to exercise the same broad authority as before. ''With or without martial law,'' he said, ''Marcos remains a dictator.'' Mr. Marcos addressed both martial law and human rights questions repeatedly in a day that included appearances at the Senate and House foreign affairs committees and a courtesy call on Senator Howard H.  Baker Jr., the majority leader. He was asked by Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, to respond to a report coming soon from Amnesty International that cites widespread torture, political arrests and murders by agents of the Marcos Government. Martial Law Defended Mr. Marcos replied that ''Amnesty International is not exactly the most accurate judge'' because the group did not visit the Philippines before preparing the report. ''Tell our good friends at Amnesty to come to the Philippines and I will personally guide them,'' he said. An Amnesty spokesman said later that the report was based on a visit by its investigators to the Philippines for 17 days last November. In a 35-minute address to the House panel, Mr. Marcos said he imposed martial law in 1972 ''because there was anarchy in the country'' and added that he had done so only after consulting with the legislature. Mr. Marcos also denied charges of authoritarianism.  ''It's not true that I decide everything alone,'' he said. Accompanied by his wife, who wore the traditional full-length butterfly-sleeve Filipino dress, Mr. Marcos moved through the Capitol this morning in a flying wedge of Philippine Cabinet members and guards. Security was unusually tight, with metal detectors in use and 200 Capitol policemen standing guard. Later, at the National Press Club, Mr. Marcos said that some Americans misunderstood him, and he repeated his earlier descriptions of the Philippines as a constitutional democracy. ''All these stories about our being repressive against our enemies and friends,'' he said. ''They've all joined the Government!'' Asked about reports of corruption, Mr. Marcos told the Press Club audience: ''You must mistake us for another nation. If any public official engages in corruption, he will land in jail.'' What of reports that Mrs. Marcos would succeed him as President?  Mr. Marcos replied that after his election his supporters urged him to appoint Mrs. Marcos Prime Minister. ''But the First Lady and I stood our ground,'' he said. ''Now is that the action of anyone who is preparing to create a dynasty?''"
