"An Indian human rights group has accused the police in Punjab State, troubled by Sikh extremism for several years, of widespread intimidation, beatings, torture and killings of purported Sikh militants. A spokesman for the human rights group, known as the Committee for Information and Initiative on Punjab, said this week that he had investigated 25 specific charges of torture and assault against Sikh villagers in the state, including several where Sikhs were killed. The group comprises lawyers and activists and is among the smaller human rights forums in India. There are daily news reports of attacks by extremists on families and police in the Punjab and, according to the Press Trust of India, two policemen and two terrorists were killed in different clashes there on Tuesday. In private conversations, senior officials have acknowledged violence by policemen on villagers and have attributed it to frayed tempers in tense situations. ''The response of many villagers is a mixture of bafflement and fear,'' said Ram Kumar, a spokesman for the Indian rights group that released its report on Monday. Mr. Kumar said that he had noticed ''tendencies to exaggerate'' among people he had interviewed. Responding to the charges, a spokesman for the Home Affairs Ministry said that ''in such a massive operation against terrorism, there are bound to be some excesses.'' The official pointed out that similar allegations had been made against the Punjab police earlier and that the Government was investigating charges against several officials. Since 1982, Punjab has been shaken by violence led by Sikhs demanding a separate state. For much of the last five years, it has been administered directly by New Delhi and the police are armed with sweeping powers to arrest and search without warrants. Thousands have died in confrontations between the militants and troops and many innocent people were also hurt or killed in the clashes and numerous sectarian riots, officials acknowledge. Amnesty International, the human rights organization, said in a report last year that it was not allowed to visit Punjab to investigate reports of torture by police and security forces. It said New Delhi should investigate such charges, adding that there were ''increasingly credible reports'' about ambushes in which militants were killed. But it said that ''many victims were involved in violence themselves and have killed civilians and security personnel, notably in Punjab.''"
