"The old practice of selling young women as brides or mistresses, often against their will, still persists in parts of rural China, despite determined efforts by the authorities to stop it. The latest crackdown has focused on Sichuan, China's most populous province, where 68 abductions were reported in one region in the first 10 months of 1982. While 83 traffickers have been caught and convicted, the campaign continues. The women were abducted in Daxian prefecture, an agricultural region in northeastern Sichuan, according to a radio broadcast last month in the provincial capital of Chengdu. The sale of poor peasant girls into arranged marriages, concubinage or prostitution was commonplace before the Communists took over in 1949. Thousands of the victims wound up in the brothels of Shanghai and other cities because their families could not afford to raise them. The Communist authorities closed the brothels and sent the women off for re-education, sometimes resettling them under new identities to give them a fresh start. 'Feudal Practice of Slavery' But the Peking Government's claim to have eradicated what it calls the ''feudal practice of slavery'' has been contradicted by reports of women for sale in at least seven Chinese provinces in the last two years. The problem is widespread enough to have been included last month in a directive on social order from the Communist Party's propaganda department. It urged tougher prosecution of ''the tiny number of criminals who abduct and sell women and children, lure and coerce women into prostitution, print and sell obscene books and pictures, organize gambling sessions for profit and use feudal superstition to swindle and harm people.'' A radio broadcast in Guizhou Province in late 1981 said that ''immediate measures must be taken to end the selling and kidnapping of women.'' The broadcast complained that ''the recurrence of widespread trafficking in women, reversing the many gains we have made since liberation in overcoming past feudalistic practices, is shocking.'' The party newspaper in neighboring Yunnan Province reported last February that 750 women from Chux@iong prefecture had been ''abducted, transported and traded'' as brides to distant Shandong and Henan Provinces. Ten percent of them were already married, Yunnan Daily said, and 60 percent were below the legal marriage age of 20 years. 71 Unwilling Brides Rescued In Hubei Province, a broadcast last February said the abduction and sale of women was relatively common in Sui county. The Wuhan radio station cited a letter from a listener revealing that five peasants in one production brigade bought and married kidnapped women, while others never got the brides they paid for. One woman who tried to escape was recaptured and beaten. Only last November, another provincial party newspaper in Fujian Province reported 21 people had been arrested there for selling abducted girls from other provinces to local peasants. Fujian Daily said 71 unwilling brides had been rescued and helped to return home. The practice of buying brides evidently continues because the peasants are willing to pay for a younger, more attractive or docile woman than they could get locally. It seems to increase before the Lunar New Year, which is the most popular season for marriage. The holiday falls on Feb. 13 in 1983. But judging by press reports, abductions have taken place all year round. A year ago, the Sichuan press related the tale of three teenagers who went off to Chongq@ing for the May Day holiday, only to be lured to neighboring Henan Province and sold. One 15-year-old tried to run home and was beaten, but sympathetic neighbors finally ransomed her for nearly $400. Tricked by Promise of a Job The late December broadcast from Sichuan said some women were tricked by the promise of a job, sightseeing or a good husband. In Dax@ian prefecture, it said, the abductors ''have deceived and seduced a small number of girls who are underage and students who attend school outside the province and have sold them in faraway places.'' The women may be too ashamed to try to return home, since virginity is still expected in rural China. ''Some criminals first have illicit sexual relations with the deceived women and girls, then sell them and indiscriminately humiliate them so that the victims are seriously ruined both physically and mentally,'' the Sichuan broadcast reported. At least some abductions have touched off violence between the traffickers and the relatives of victims. The recent report from Sichuan said some family members had been killed, while local suspicions had resulted in ''fighting and killing'' that seriously jeopardized the social order. There are also hints that some peasant families may have let their daughters go to make room for sons to work the land. The Government's stringent birth control policies limit couples to one or at most two children and boys have been traditionally preferred over girls in the countryside. Five or Six Cases a Day Last March, an ideological worker in Yunnan's Chuxiong prefecture complained in a letter to the newspaper in Kunming that ''some parents are greedy and sell their daughters as if they were commodities'' and some married women abandoned their husbands and children ''to seek ease and comfort and to get more money.'' He said that five or six cases a day had been reported to the local police in the prefecture. In Guangdong Province, some wives or mistresses have been procured for married men in Hong Kong who also want a spouse on the mainland.  The Guangdong authorities tightened up last fall on applications from overseas Chinese applying to marry local women. In Yunnan, an official, Cheng Zhanb@iao, was expelled from the Communist Party last May after he arranged for his daughter to live with a Hong Kong man who also had a mistress back home. The Peking Government has also waged a broader campaign against the traditional custom of arranged marriages. Last spring, three high school students in Shandong Province wrote the provincial Women's Federation pleading for help in avoiding marriages arranged while they were children. They said that marriages in Shanghe county, where they live, were being negotiated when some partners were only six or seven years old and did not even know each other."
