"As Korean-Americans marked South Korean Liberation Day yesterday with rallies for democracy, Amnesty International urged the South Korean Government to release all prisoners of conscience and provide new guarantees for human rights. In its latest report on dissent in South Korea, the international human rights organization expressed concern that as many as 900 political prisoners were still being held, including dozens imprisoned for their peaceful opposition to the Government. Welcoming the recent release of prisoners in South Korea, John G. Healey, executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A., called for ''the immediate unconditional freedom of the remaining prisoners of conscience,'' as a demonstration of the Government's commitment to safeguard human rights. In what was described as their first nationwide demonstration, Korean- Americans held rallies here and in ten other United States cities to demand that the Chun Doo Hwan regime carry out its promised reforms. Release Political Prisoners A common resolution adopted by the rallies called for the release of all political prisoners, specifically: Lee Poo Young, Chang Ki Pyo and Kim Keum Tae. The resolution also urged the Reagan Administration not to support the regime's Presidential candidate, General Roh Tai Woo, and asked for the discharge of South Korean Chief of Staff, General Park Hee Do, who reportedly made a veiled threat against opposition leader, Kim Dae Jung. With traditional drums and cymbals, some 70 demonstrators gathered in front of the South Korean Consulate in midtown Manhattan, brandishing signs in Korean and English with slogans such as: ''No more military dictatorship'' and ''U.S. Stop Supporting General Roh.'' The rally was organized by the New York Coalition for Democracy in Korea, formed recently by Korean community and religious groups. Expressing disappointment in the low turnout, the Rev. Kyung Suk Soh of the Korean Church of Brooklyn, said: ''People here tend to think the crisis in Korea is over but we have to put continuous pressure on the regime to get real democracy.'' Amnesty International's report, ''Political Imprisonment in the Republic of Korea'' was said to be timed to coincide with discussions underway for the preparation of a new constitution. Noting that human rights violations continue, despite prior constitutional safeguards, Amnesty International makes a number or recommendations to the South Korean Government, including: *amend security laws to guarantee the rights of freedom of opinion, expression, association and peaceful assembly; *end practices of incommunicado detention and interrogtion to ensure protection against torture; *guarantee the right to prompt and fair trial, access to counsel and investigation of all claims of ill-treatment; *commute all death sentences and take steps to abolish the death penalty. Detention and Ill-Treatment Expressing concern over the continued detention and ill-treatment of a number of prisoners of conscience, Amnesty International presents case histories of 23 Koreans being held ''solely for their non-violent opposition to the Government.'' It cites the case of Kim Hyon Jang, a free-lance journalist, serving a life sentence on charges of involvement in an arson attack on the American Cultural Center in Pusan in March, 1982. Denying any knowledge of the attack, Mr. Kim testified that he had been forced to make a false confession under torture. There is also the case of the publisher, Lee Tae Bok, sentenced to life imprisonment for publishing ''pro-communist books'' such as translations of texts on economics and social sciences. During his trial, which began Oct. 29, 1981, Mr. Lee reportedly described being tied naked to a coffin and beaten, threatened with death, immersed in water, given electric shocks and beaten on the soles of his feet...''until I felt there was nothing I could do but agree to their charges.''"
