"Prince Norodom Sihanouk told the General Assembly today that his rebel forces were holding their own against the Hanoi-backed Government in Phnom Penh. The Prince, who is recognized by the United Nations as the legitimate head of state of Cambodia, asserted in a speech that forces of the opposition coalition he leads had recently made inroads into regions near the Cambodian capital, causing ''serious concern'' for the Vietnamese. The rebel alliance consists of two non-Communist groups and the Khmer Rouge, which is Communist. The Prince said that despite claims by Hanoi, his troops had not been ''seriously weakened by the so-called big victories of the Vietnamese offensive'' this year. The war that has plagued Cambodia since 1979, when Vietnam invaded, removed Pol Pot from power and installed its own regime, has been touched on by other speakers at the General Assembly in recent days. But other speakers, unlike Prince Sihanouk, have given greater urgency to such matters as racial violence in South Africa, nuclear arms and the increasing debt of developing countries. Last June, the Prince expressed concern that his guerrillas' inability to take a single town or district could jeopardize United Nations recognition of the coalition. But Vietnam said in August that it would not fight to seat the Phnom Penh Government at this year's General Assembly. Quoting extensively from newspaper reports to support his statements, the Prince accused the Hanoi-backed regime of systematically violating human rights and encouraging torture. He said it was the duty of the United Nations to protect human rights ''at all costs.'' In another address, Pakistan's Foreign Minister concentrated on the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, which has been raised only marginally by other speakers. Calling the invasion in 1979 a flagrant violation of that country's independence, the official, Sahabzada Yaqub Khan, said Pakistan suffered effects of the conflict. Pakistan has absorbed more than three million Afghan refugees, Mr. Yaqub Khan said, ''testimony to the popular rejection of the foreign presence.'' In addition to the refugees' strain on Pakistan's ''limited resources,'' he said, his country faced ''repeated attacks'' from the Afghan side on Pakistani territory."
