"''You, as a witness to history, have the obligation to tell only the truth,'' a questioner told a former official as he took his seat, hands trembling visibly, at a televised parliamentary hearing. ''You do not have the right to lie.'' There has been both truth and untruth during five days of hearings into abuses during the eight-year rule of Chun Doo Hwan, but many people here say that was to be expected. The important thing, they say, is that after years of secrecy and repression, a painful re-examination of Mr. Chun's martial rule, with its climate of fear and mutual distrust, has begun. There have been few bombshells at the hearings, which are examining three issues that dramatize Mr. Chun's methods of rule as President. Their main effect has been to drive home the pervasiveness of corrupt and repressive conduct that had until now been the subject only of rumor and unproved allegations by students and opposition politicians. Witnesses and parliamentary questioners have accused Mr. Chun of extorting donations from businesses that totaled 60 billion won, or about $86 million at current exchange rates. As many as 11 of his relatives have been arrested on charges of corruption under his rule, and he and his wife, Lee Soon Ja, are also threatened with arrest. Charges of Rights Abuses In addition, Mr. Chun has been accused in emotionally charged testimony of human rights abuses that include the masterminding of a 1980 massacre of civilian protesters as a pretext for seizing full military control of the Government. Hour after hour, in relentless, low-key questioning that lasts late into the night, the nation is searching the dark corners of its recent past in a process that some people say is irrevocably changing South Korea. ''People are overwhelmed,'' said Kim Young Seok, a professor of communications at Yonsei University. ''It is the first time in Korea that the past is being exposed.'' ''The core system is changing,'' he said. ''Things that were secret are being opened. I think in the future, because of this kind of hearing, those in power cannot act as before. It is a gigantic step toward democracy.'' Mr. Chun himself has been in seclusion at his home, refusing to testify at the hearings, while protesting students chant for his execution. Roh Hints at a Pardon His successor as President, Roh Tae Woo, has put pressure on him to avoid prosecution by making an apology to the nation, returning illegally gained wealth and exiling himself from Seoul. After weeks of backstage bargaining and veiled public threats from both sides, the Korean press is now reporting that Mr. Chun may address the nation this week. In remarks quoted today by the Government-owned newspaper Seoul, Mr. Roh broke a weeklong silence to imply that he might consider a pardon for Mr. Chun if the former President's apology is satisfactory. Mr. Roh faces a delicate political task in dealing with the former President, whom he served faithfully throughout his term in office. Justice must be seen to have been done without upsetting the tenuous balance of current politics. But as the hearings continue, Mr. Chun's fate has become only one element in a broader drama. ''The most important issue at this stage for Korea is, I think, cleaning up the past,'' said Lee Shin Bum, an opposition member of Parliament who will testify this week about his own imprisonment by the Chun Government. ''It is like all the dirt has been piled up and needs to be cleaned away before you can talk about the future in any real sense,'' he said. ''The hearings are having a revolutionary impact on the people.'' First Round of Hearings The first round of hearings, earlier this month, explored corruption and an apparent plan by Mr. Chun to perpetuate himself in power after formal retirement through the use of a publicly funded political institute. Most gripping at those sessions was the unrepentent appearance of the former chief of Korea's security services, Chang Se Dong, a man whose name was familiar to all Koreans but whose face they had rarely seen. Last week, and again later this week, the hearings are examining one of the key elements of Mr. Chun's rule, the suppression of a popular uprising in 1980 at Kwangju at which hundreds of protesters were killed. Although Mr. Chun's men, including the former Defense Minister, Choo Young Bok, denied it, much of the testimony indicated that the killings may have been a premeditated attempt to consolidate political power for the ruling military group. ''It was a coup,'' a young Korean journalist said. ''This was something we could only whisper in the past. It is extremely moving for people to hear such talk in public.''"
