"Americans agree on two goals in Cambodia: First, Vietnam should end its occupation and let Cambodians choose their own government. Second, no solution is morally tolerable if it permits a return to power by Pol Pot and the mass murderers of the Khmer Rouge. Now a whirl of diplomacy has brought the first goal in sight. There's no worthier challenge for the new Bush Administration than to make sure the Khmer Rouge gets no chance to wreak new horrors on a shattered nation. War weariness, changing geopolitics and a desire for regional commerce have combined to dissolve Southeast Asia's bitterest enmities. Signs now point to a deal in which Vietnam would withdraw its troops from Cambodia by fall and China would simultaneously cease aid to the Khmer Rouge. It is in this context that a ranking Hanoi negotiator last week visited Beijing and that Hun Sen, Cambodia's Vietnamese-backed leader, this week traveled to Bangkok. Yet lamentably missing is evidence of real concern among outside negotiators for the fate of Cambodia's people. Energetic American diplomacy is needed. The Soviet Union is pressuring Vietnam to withdraw from Cambodia, thereby enabling Moscow to improve ties with Beijing. A straitened Vietnam wants to wind up a costly war that has deprived it of trade with thriving neighbors. Thailand is eager to shed the burden of Cambodian refugee camps and revive regional commerce. So all parties are moving toward an accord establishing an interim regime, with some kind of international body to monitor withdrawal and transition. But none of these actors seem overly concerned about the wishes and interests of Cambodians. That's one reason for this week's protest by Cambodia's former chief of state, Prince Sihanouk, that he would not swallow whole a peace plan concocted by Hanoi's client regime. Since the Prince is everybody's choice to head an interim government, he has some leverage. The trick is to help him while keeping from power the Khmer Rouge's 40,000 well-armed guerrillas, by far the strongest indigenous military force. In the rush to reconcile different outside needs, various formulas are thrown up that collapse on scrutiny. For example, it is conveniently argued that young Khmer Rouge leaders, supposedly untainted by Pol Pot, would be acceptable in an interim coalition. More likely they would be stand-ins for the old clique thirsting for vengeance in new killing fields. The Khmer Rouge's genocidal atrocities between 1975 and 1978 are a matter of grisly record. It tears at any sense of decency to condone giving Pol Pot's guerrillas any share of power. Congress so expressed itself, unanimously. So did Ronald Reagan. It would be timely and right for President Bush to appoint a top diplomat to work to prevent another Khmer Rouge crime against humanity. Outsiders, including the United States, share blame for Pol Pot's original accession to power in 1975. The world cannot plead ignorance if it negligently allows a recurrence."
