"The late Benigno S. Aquino Jr. predicted that whoever succeeded Ferdinand E. Marcos as President of the Philippines would be ''doomed to failure'' because of the devastation wrought by 20 years of Mr. Marcos's corrupt dictatorship. Mr. Aquino could hardly have guessed he was forecasting the fate of his own wife. Much less could he have fathomed Corazon C. Aquino's remarkable ability to steer her fragile Government through the daunting challenges it faced during its first year, including coup threats from restive military factions, a Communist insurgency and an economy devastated by Mr. Marcos's profligate habits. The next year will provide a true measure of Mrs. Aquino's ability to prove her husband wrong. The Government must make tangible progress in addressing many seemingly intractable problems. Now that negotiations with the Communist rebels have failed, Mrs. Aquino says she seeks ''a string of honorable military victories.'' Yet the Philippine Army is ill-equipped to fight an insurgency war. Moreover, with a new Constitution in place, a working democracy must be established - a process currently under way as the nation prepares to elect a national assembly. Above all, the Government must begin to deliver on land reform and other measures to improve the well-being of the millions of Filipinos steeped in poverty. Under the best circumstances, it would take years to address some of these problems. But for President Aquino to retain public support, she must deliver on the fundamental promise of the ''people power'' revolution that swept her into office: respect for human rights. Although rights abuses by the armed forces have declined markedly since Mrs. Aquino took office, they persist. Two recent incidents underscore the need for heightened vigilance toward human rights as military activity escalates. On Feb. 11, soldiers killed 17 civilians in the town of Lupao after a skirmish with rebels in which a soldier was killed. After the rebels fled, the civilians, including five children, were lined up and shot. The killings came shortly after an incident in which more than a dozen demonstrators for land reform were gunned down in front of Malacanang Palace in Manila. Significantly, the military leadership recognizes that the armed forces cannot hope to win the war against the insurgents if such violations continue. The Armed Forces Chief of Staff, Fidel V. Ramos, told his army it ''cannot afford any more Lupaos'' if it hopes to win public support. Nevertheless, the military and civilian leaders have faced severe constraints in their ability to transform an ill-disciplined army into a professional force that respects human rights. While the top military leaders are committed to human rights, restive factions in the armed forces harbor intense hostililty toward human rights initiatives, viewing them as Communist propaganda. The Government has yet to gain full control over those factions, as a bombing attempt last month against the President - now thought to have been staged by a dissident military group - dramatically illustrated. It is hardly surprising that the Government has failed so far to hold a single member of the security forces legally accountable for a rights violation. This must change if the military is to gain popular support. The Lupao and Manila incidents, along with the pending retrial in the Aquino assassination case, provide important opportunities for the Government to begin holding security forces accountable for rights abuses. The Government is now in a stronger position than at any time in the last year to take decisive action on this issue without provoking a backlash from hostile military factions. President Aquino's unequivocal support, expressed last month at the Philippine Military Academy, for an all-out military campaign against the Communists should blunt the dissident officers' primary criticism of her administration's policies. Such prosecutions could help deter future violations if they were carried out with sensitivity to the concerns of the younger officers who are suspicious of human rights initiatives. The Government has already taken an important step. The recently adopted Constitution calls for a Presidential Commission on Human Rights to monitor abuses by the rebels as well as Government forces. The Government must also act to reverse another disturbing development - the proliferation of armed, anti-Communist vigilante groups. In the city of Davao where the first group, known as Alsa Masa, was founded a year ago, the military has embraced the vigilantes. Elsewhere, local government authorities are encouraging the growth of similar groups. The appeal is obvious: The vigilantes can do the dirty work of counterinsurgency for a military that is ill-prepared to launch effective operations. The Government should act decisively to avert the grave threat to human rights that the vigilantes pose. Laws prohibiting unlicensed use of firearms should be rigorously enforced. Other abuses, such as death threats over the radio, should be punished. Top officials should publicly condemn such behavior. The rapid proliferation of vigilantes threatens to create a new generation of private armies, which have been profoundly destabilizing in the past. Revolutions do not happen overnight. Human rights revolutions are no exception. As military operations intensify, the Government must keep human rights at the very top of its agenda."
