"In a carefully worded statement, the South Korean Embassy here said today that the Seoul Government was detaining more than 3,000 people under a law that permits the authorities to hold prisoners without trial and without charges. The statement appeared to be intended to rebut reports here that South Korea is holding 15,000 people in forced-labor camps run by the army. ''As of Sept. 20 the number held under the Social Protection Law was 3,228,'' said Cha Yun, a spokesman for the embassy. The statement did, however, confirm the existence of the camps, something Seoul had previously never acknowledged. Mr. Cha said he was quoting figures supplied by the South Korean Ministry of Justice. He did not say where the people were held or whether others were incarcerated at the camps under other laws. Law Passed in December The Social Protection Law, which was passed last December, a month before martial law ended, allows the state to hold people under ''protective custody'' for years. The law, Mr. Cha said, is administered ''after thorough examination by the Social Protection Committee,'' which is composed of judges, prosecutors and lawyers. Article 5 of the law permits incarceration without trial or indictment, he said. A key question still unanswered is who is held in the labor camps, which are said by former prisoners to be close to the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea. Reports reaching here have said the prisoners are mainly common criminals but include ''a few political prisoners.'' The South Korean Embassy here denies that any political prisoners are held under the Social Protection Law. ''They are all thieves, robbers and othe r criminals,'' Mr. Cha said. ''There is not a single person you can categorize as a political pri soner.'' Estimates of 300 to 500 But the South Korean National Council of Churches, Roman Catholic activist groups in Seoul and Japanese human rights experts all estimated political prisoners in South Korea as numbering 320 in late August. Amnesty International, the London-based human rights group, put the figure at more than 500 in a recent report on South Korea. The Seoul Government and human rights groups apparently differ in their definitions of ''political prisoner.'' The Government maintains, for instance, that Kim Dae Jung, South Korea's leading dissident, who is imprisoned on a life sentence for sedition, is simply a criminal. People released from the camps confirmed, as stated in reports here, that most of those held there are common criminals, immediately identifiable from their speech and body tattoos, which are common among professional criminals in South Korea. The justification given by Seoul officials for the Social Protection Law is the need to control organiz ed crime. This is done in the name of ''purification,'' with judges and prosecutors given free rein to decide who is ''pure'' and who ' 'impure'' in the absenceof legal definition of the vague concepts."
