"To the Editor: The Reagan Administration's opposition to the 98-to-0 Senate vote condemning the arrests and mistreatment of Tibetans by Chinese authorities (news story, Oct. 7) shows a continuing callousness to human rights on the part of the Administration, and an important inconsistency. The most common argument invoked by the Administration to justify funding the Nicaraguan contras is the continuing abuses of human rights by the Sandinistas. But by any commonly accepted measure of international human rights, the human rights abuses and anti-democratic practices by Chinese authorities are far more serious: religious and ethnic minorities such as the Tibetans are restricted from operating freely; political dissenters and religious leaders have been imprisoned, and reports of torture in prison are common. There is no freedom of speech or press, and the system of law has little semblance of due process. But in the case of China, the Administration looks the other way, resisting even the most minimal attempt to impact on or denounce the abuses of rights, never mind sponsoring war as it has done in the case of Nicaragua. An important lesson lies in this. The Administration's invocation of the human rights argument, in order to supplement other less palatable and convincing arguments to justify funding the contras, is not a testament to the growing importance of the international human rights movement but rather a perversion of it. For when the issue of human rights is invoked conveniently for the sake of promoting policy in a particular instance, the entire concept of human rights is perverted and with it the much-needed capacity to generate the international moral pressure. On a practical level, human rights alone can rarely be a basis for entering or commencing war; if it were we would be at war with too many countries across the globe. But it should be the basis for consistent use of carrots and sticks to promote rights - rights for the struggling South African blacks, for Soviet Jews seeking emigration, for millions of others. That can be done effectively only if it is seen that the motive is human rights and not some particular political agenda. JOHN CONYERS JR. Washington, Nov. 4, 1987   The writer is chairman of the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Criminal Justice."
