"The president of the American Bar Association expressed concern today over the treatment of human rights lawyers in the Philippines, saying they were arrested, harassed and sometimes killed in the last year. As the bar association ended a weeklong convention here, John C. Shepherd, president of the association, listed for President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines the various abuses Mr. Shepherd said human rights lawyers in the Philippines had been subjected to. Three members of the Free Legal Assistance Group, an association of volunteer human rights lawyers, have been killed since last September, Mr. Shepherd wrote. The most recent slaying occurred earlier this week. ''The ability of lawyers to represent their clients and judges to decide cases independent of political or extra-judicial influence is fundamental to maintaining international norms of equal justice for all,'' Mr. Shepherd wrote. Anti-Torture Bills Backed In another action, the association's policy-making House of Delegates voted to support legislation giving the victims of torture abroad or their families the right to sue their torturers in American courts. A third resolution was passed by the House of Delegates by voice vote, calling on state legislatures to enact laws forbidding the use of corporal punishment in public schools. That resolution was opposed by some local school boards on the ground that it would limit their autonomy. However, it says the bar group ''does not oppose such force as is reasonable and necessary to quell a disturbance threatening physical injury to persons or property.'' The votes came shortly before the 310,000-member bar association adjourned the first phase of its annual meeting here and prepared to move as a group to England in what is being referred to there as ''the greatest invasion since William the Conqueror.'' The association will reconvene in London next Monday. Minimum Age for Drinking In other actions, the delegates called on all states to make 21 the minimum legal age for drinking alcoholic beverages and urged adoption of a series of other measures to combat teen-age alcohol and drug abuse. The association also relaxed its previous stand on restrictions on the use of preventive detention and gave provisional accreditation to the two year-old City University of New York Law School at Queens College. In his letter to President Marcos, Mr. Shepherd cited the slaying of three human rights lawyers, Zorro Aguilar, Romraflo Taojo and Chrisostomo Cailing. All were members of the Free Legal Assistance Group, or FLAG, whose 250 members represent defendants in political cases and the victims of human rights abuses. ''Essentially, Marcos is trying to shut down FLAG,'' said Diane F. Orentlicher of the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights in New York, which lobbied for the letter. ''A letter from the A.B.A. president carries enormous weight in the Philippine judicial system.'' The vote on corporal punishment brought the bar association's position in line with such nations as Italy, the Netherlands and the Soviet Union, which have long barred the practice. Corporal punishment has never been outlawed under Federal law, although Hawaii, Maine, Massachusetts, New Jersey and Vermont have done away with it. The legislation called for in the torture resolution would resolve a a conflict between two Federal appellate courts over whether American citizens or aliens could bring actions in the United States against foreign officials who commit torture or extrajudicial killings abroad. An appeals court in New York ruled five years ago that the parents and sister of a Latin American torture victim could bring suit in the United States. Last year, however, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia dismissed a similar action."
