"Behind the unapproachable walls of the Blue House, the seat of South Korean power, President Chun Doo Hwan is an aloof, enigmatic figure to most of his 41 million countrymen. Six years have passed since he founded his Fifth Republic, and seven since he seized power as head of a band of impatient army generals. His pronouncements and public appearances lead news broadcasts almost every night on the Government-owned television networks. Yet the President's personality emerges only on occasion. South Koreans say they really know little about their President, except perhaps that they do not like him. Daily Reminders of Repression The disaffection goes with daily reminders of limits on their freedoms. In Seoul, they see the many plainclothes policemen patrolling their streets, easily identified by tan windbreakers, close-cropped hair and iron faces. They know they face arrest if they march in protest, and the last few months have been marked by Government repression of opposition attempts to protest police torture and to demand greater political freedoms. From back-alley shopowners to politicians within his own party, South Koreans say Mr. Chun has always been an unpopular leader, even though he has ruled during a period of expanding national prosperity and international prestige. In his countrymen's eyes, he never acquired legitimacy because his soldiers massacred scores of people in the city of Kwangju to help him consolidate power in 1980. ''In a direct election, the President probably would lose against almost anyone,'' a member of Mr. Chun's own party said. ''Even I could beat him.'' A Few Critical Decisions But Mr. Chun's intentions form the paramount concern for South Koreans as they enter one of the more critical periods in their eventful history. What happens over the next few months may determine whether their country moves toward democracy, augmenting its impressive economic growth, or slides into political crisis and perhaps even martial law. On this divided, heavily armed peninsula, the direction that is chosen will have important strategic implications as well, not only for South Korea but also for its main ally, the United States. These are among the conclusions drawn by correspondents of The New York Times in dozens of interviews with South Korean officials, ruling-party and opposition figures, scholars and citizens from many walks of life, from business executives to bus drivers. (Requests for an interview with President Chun were turned down by his spokesmen.) In a sense, all issues boil down to one central question: Will the general-turned-president keep his word? Mr. Chun, 56 years old, has promised to leave the Blue House next Feb. 24, and thereby preside over the first peaceful transfer of government since the Republic of Korea came into being four decades ago. For now, most signs suggest he will indeed step aside. But that supposition raises more questions: Will he truly yield power? Or will he try to manipulate control from behind the scenes? And if he does, will South Koreans acquiesce or rebel? ''We've been asking these questions for years,'' a Western diplomat said. ''But the clock is running, and the ticking has gotten kind of loud.'' With less than a year left in Mr. Chun's presidency, there is still no clear idea how he will step down and what form of government will follow, let alone who its leader might be. Ruling and opposition parties have talked for nearly a year about ways to select the next chief of state, but they have made no real progress. Both sides agree that the present system must go. It calls for indirect selection of a president by a large electoral college; six years ago, it was easily rigged to guarantee the ratification of Mr. Chun as head of state. On most other points, though, agreement disappears. Mr. Chun's ruling Democratic Justice Party wants the constitution changed to create a cabinet-style system headed by a prime minister. The opposition New Korea Democratic Party, which is guided from behind the scenes by Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam, insists on direct presidential elections. Each side offers a litany of explanations as to why its proposal is the more democratic. But the real issue is power, and neither camp believes it can win under the other's plan. Pressure Points: Events and Emotions Amid the bickering, Mr. Chun has added an ominous note by warning that he will be forced into an unspecified ''grave decision'' if no settlement is reached. Meanwhile, the approaching deadline adds pressures that political analysts believe could cause pent-up Korean emotions to boil. The pressures come from many directions. They come most conspicuously from the political opposition, whose cause is not helped by the fact that it is badly fragmented over personalities and strategy, and is in danger of coming apart. Its internal disputes could trigger a crisis of their own. Pressures come from South Korea's university students, traditionally viewed as the conscience of the nation. Campus protesters are a distinct minority, but they are influenced by a deeply committed core of leftist radicals who are increasingly unafraid of violent acts, including self-immolation, to express their hatred of the regime. Pressures come from the business elite and the growing numbers of South Koreans who regard themselves as middle-class. They desperately wish to avoid political instability that might undermine the economic growth. Pressures come from the armed forces, which stand beside the Government-subsidized conglomerates as a pillar of South Korean society. The military still supports the President that it installed, and in day-to-day matters has stayed on the sidelines. But it has little tolerance for civil disruption, and could assert its power at any moment. For the foreseeable future, only someone who commands its loyalty can govern. There are diplomatic pressures created by the Olympic Games that will be held in Seoul next year and that have already have put domestic politics under close, potentially unsettling, international inspection. There are pressures from the United States, South Korea's greatly respected, deeply resented mentor. The Americans maintain 40,000 troops here and keep the economy churning by absorbing 35 percent to 40 percent of the country's exports. Tensions between the allies have risen in recent years over trade imbalances, an echo of Washington's bigger battle against Japan. By comparison, the United States-Korea situation is mild. But the American trade deficit with Seoul rose to more than $7 billion last year, and demand is growing for South Korea to open its markets to more imports. Testiness on this issue is accompanied by Washington's increasing weariness with the bickering over constitutional revision. As a de facto patron, it has begun to make clear that it wants Mr. Chun and his opponents to resolve their differences quickly. Finally, there are pressures from North Korea, only three minutes from Seoul by air. An Enduring Theme: Threat From the North In a sense, North Korea gives South Korea's internal politics its definition. Mr. Chun's regime is merely the latest of several since the 1950-53 Korean War to argue that, because of the North, South Korea can afford only so much democracy. Broader civil liberties are desirable but controls are necessary, Government officials contend. Too many Western-style freedoms, they assert, would undermine the unity and vigilance needed to resist a committed enemy with proven tendencies toward irrational behavior. Dissident leaders, the most prominent being Kim Dae Jung, argue the opposite. With democracy, Mr. Kim says, South Koreans would install a popularly elected Government that would be even stronger against the North. But the advocates of authoritarian rule hold sway, and are likely to continue to do so. Since taking power Mr. Chun has swung back and forth between harsh repression and relative tolerance toward dissent. But he has always made clear that the only question is how long his opponents' leash will be, not whether they will be tied to one. Constant Reminder: The Police Presence By the opposition's count, difficult to confirm but widely accepted, at least 1,900 South Koreans are in jail on politically related charges. Systematic torture of prisoners is a grim reality, as evidenced by the recent death of a college student who suffocated while in police custody. To strengthen his power base, Mr. Chun has considerably expanded the national police force, estimated at 120,000 men and women. About 60,000 are combat officers, mostly young conscripts whose numbers are believed to have doubled in the last five years. In their medieval-looking helmets they are an ominous street presence during anti-Government protests. They routinely use tear gas to break up demonstrations, which at various times in the last year have occurred almost daily. The gas, manufactured under Government license, is uncommonly potent, lingering on the streets for days. It is so strong that, according to a knowledgeable South Korean businessman, the manufacturer tried to negotiate exports to the Philippines but was turned down by the Manila authorities because they considered the gas ''inhumane.'' The War's Legacy: A Nation on Alert Beyond the police, South Koreans have another crucial reminder of the constraints under which they live. It is that 34 years after the Korean War, their country is still on alert, its 620,000 troops ready for instant mobilization. In the capital, amid the gleaming skyscrapers that speak of new prosperity, come endless whispers of possible war. The worries about invasion from the north would broaden if the present political situation were to slide into crisis and instability. Once a month, an air-raid drill clears Seoul's streets for 25 minutes as pedestrians and motorists rush to underground shelters. On Yoido Island in the Han River in the heart of the city, children fly kites on an enormous open plaza that is designed to serve, if needed, as a landing strip. Brick flower beds decorate the streets, but can be converted quickly into gun emplacements. Because of perceived security needs, the military is the single most important institution in South Korea. It absorbs one-third of the Government budget. Most South Korean men must spend several years in uniform. Until fairly recently, the military was the only dependable source of trained managers for business or government. From its ranks came the two men who have ruled for the last 26 years - Park Chung Hee, assassinated in 1979, and Mr. Chun. ''You can't say that the military involves itself in the daily affairs of government - that is left to the technocrats, especially on economic issues,'' said a member of the Democratic Justice Party, which was created by Mr. Chun in late 1980 in an effort to lend legitimacy to his rule. Rather, this politician said, the generals stand in the background, unapproachable but in effect the final arbiters of Korean politics. ''There is a threshold that they will not allow to be breached,'' he said. ''They wouldn't just sit by if they thought there was instability, or if someone like Kim Dae Jung became president. That would be unacceptable. They would step in.'' The Generals' Role: A Fraternity of Power Inside the Blue House, according to Korean and foreign experts, Mr. Chun presides as undisputed head of a collective of former generals who grabbed power after the Park assassination. The key officers then belonged to the class of 1955 at the Korea Military Academy. They were the first cadets put through an expanded four-year program, and from the beginning they viewed themselves as a new elite destined to take charge. Chun Doo Hwan, born to a farm family in South Kyongsang Province, was a particularly forceful figure, a natural leader even though he had ranked academically near the bottom of the class. His Government, although managed by civilians in most positions, has always been top-heavy with former generals in critical posts. Leading figures now include Defense Minister Lee Ki Baek, class of 1955; the director of the National Security Planning Agency, Chang Se Dong, class of 1960; Home Minister Chung Ho Yong, class of 1955; and the chairman of the Seoul Olympics Organizing Committee, Park Se Jik, class of 1956. In addition, the chairman of the ruling party is Roh Tae Woo, class of 1955. ''It means you've got military men in charge of the police, the party, the army, the intelligence network and the Olympics,'' a foreign diplomat said. ''That's a lot of control.'' Moreover, President Chun has appointed hundreds of retired military officers to positions in important agencies at national and local levels, from ambassadors to small-town mayors to the chief of the Seoul subway system. This feeds occasional charges of cronyism and even corruption, but the opposition does not make much of the issue, in part because it recognizes that it would invite a swift Government crackdown. ''Chun's got his guys all out there,'' said a foreign resident intimately familiar with the armed forces. ''You've got a formal Government, and then you have this sort of informal government that really controls things.'' Another expert added, ''It's not a military Government in the junta sense, but it is a military Government in that military thinking dominates.'' There has been a growing call by South Koreans for the generals to leave governance to civilians, a call also picked up with greater fervor recently by the United States. But Mr. Chun's aides insist that that goal is already in sight. ''There are 24 ministers, and less than five are from the military,'' said Lee Jong Ryool, the presidential press secretary. ''I think President Chun is much more a civilian than many opposition leaders because he is less authoritarian than them,'' Mr. Lee said. ''He has been a civilian for six or seven years now. He thinks like a civilian now. He has civilian attitudes.'' Made in Korea: Business and Politics Big business forms another pillar of Mr. Chun's power. Huge conglomerates have received vast amounts of Government encouragement and subsidies. In return, they help underwrite the ruling party and organizations such as the Ilhae Foundation, which acts as a financial base for the President. To guide the conglomerates, and the economy in general, Mr. Chun has turned away from the military and relied instead on professional bureaucrats, many of them American-educated men of unquestioned competence. During Mr. Chun's tenure, South Korea's export-driven economy has been a continuing success story. Not that it is without glaring weak spots, such as a $44 billion foreign debt. But thanks to its first recorded trade surplus, the country was able last year to repay part of what it owed, and so its credit-worthiness remains intact. What is striking, however, is how reluctant South Koreans are to give him credit. ''Why should we?'' a businessman said. ''He didn't do it. We did.'' Political analysts say Mr. Chun has endured mainly because of military support, and perhaps also because most South Koreans are weary of turmoil and are willing, in the interest of stability, to live a while longer with an unpopular leader. In the Blue House, officials say that Mr. Chun has developed a reservoir of self-confidence that enables him now to seek advice beyond a small cadre of trusted generals. He also has avoided a cult of personality. While he is a nightly presence on the Government-controlled news broadcasts, there is nothing that remotely approaches the lionization of the North Korean leader, Kim Il Sung. Still, there is great sensitivity to anything of a personal nature said or written about the President and his family. A television broadcaster who forgot one night to include a required honorific for the President's wife, Lee Soong Ja, found himself the next morning out of a job and in police hands. Taboo subjects include corruption charges that have been leveled against Lee Soong Ja's relatives and against the President's brother, Chun Kyung Hwan, appointed to head the Saemaul Undong, an important rural-development program. Behavior of this sort reflects a strongman tradition in Korean politics, which is amply evident in the opposition as well. It is coupled with a pronounced tendency to form political alliances based on regional loyalties. Together, some scholars argue, these traditions have thwarted development of a broad-based, issue-oriented political structure. Parties are weak, serving essentially as vehicles for personal power, not for political unity. Han Sung Joo, a professor at Korea University, observed in a study that ''no parties, pro-Government and opposition alike, have stayed around long enough to claim loyalty and support from the people.'' This fundamental weakness of political identity makes it difficult to predict whether South Korea has turned a political corner under Mr. Chun, or is destined after he leaves to recycle familiar patterns of turmoil and military suppression. Much will depend on what Mr. Chun himself decides behind his Blue House walls. No action that he has ever taken looms larger than the manner in which he will choose to relinquish power - if he relinquishes power. That South Koreans want him out is not questioned. It is even acknowledged, unwittingly perhaps, by his aides. ''He will get more popular when he leaves,'' said Lee Jong Ryool, the presidential spokesman. ''That step in itself is an important milestone in Korean history.'' Modern History 1910:  Japan annexes Korea. 1919:  Japanese crush independence movement. 1945:  United States and Soviet Union partition Korea. 1948:  North and South Korean Governments established. 1950:  North Korea invades South; United States leads 16-country United Nations force. Chinese troops enter war. 1953:  Armistice signed at Panmunjom. 1960:  Student uprising topples civilian Government of Syngman Rhee. 1961:  Gen. Park Chung Hee overthrows interim civilian Government. 1971:  North and South Korea hold first talks. Park Chung Hee defeats Kim Dae Jung in presidential election. Recent Events 1979:  Park Chung Hee is assassinated by the head of the Korean Central Intelligence Agency; his Prime Minister, Choi Kyu Hah, assumes office. 1980:  Gen. Chun Doo Hwan seizes power under full martial law; key opposition leaders are jailed or placed under house arrest. Student-led protests break out in the southern city of Kwangju; army troops kill scores of demonstrators. 1981:  Chun is elected President under a new Constitution, which is approved without debate in a public referendum. 1983:  A terrorist bomb in Rangoon, Burma, narrowly misses President Chun, but kills several South Korean Cabinet officials; Burmese officials blame North Korean agents. 1984:  At the demilitarized zone, North Korean guards open fire on a fleeing Soviet defector; three North Koreans and a South Korean soldier are killed in an ensuing firefight. 1985:  North-South talks resume on economic cooperation, parliamentary exchanges and reunification of families. 1986:  North Korea suspends talks with Seoul, saying annual maneuvers in the South are a cover for war preparations. South Korea asserts that North Korean border loudspeakers are saying that President Kim Il Sung has been assassinated; two days later, Kim appears in public. 1987:  Chun Government acknowledges that a university student has been killed during police interrogation; two policemen are charged and the Interior Minister and the national police chief are dismissed. Demonstrations in Seoul and other cities are dispersed with tear gas by the police. Seoul and Pyongyang exchange proposals for resuming talks. The Land and the People Korea's original inhabitants are thought to have migrated eastward from the Altaic Mountains of Central Asia. Korean is a Ural-Altaic language that bears little resemblance to Chinese or Japanese. Confucian ethics are predominant in South Korea, but Buddhism and Taoism are also important, and Christian churches wield significant influence. The mountainous peninsula has been invaded repeatedly over the centuries. It is a land of dry, bitterly cold winters and hot, humid summers. South Korea, with a population of 41 million, is about the size of Indiana. North Korea is larger and more forested, about the size of Pennsylvania, but has a population of only 19 million."
