"United Nations refugee officials are asking Hong Kong not to forcibly return any more boat people to Vietnam until an international meeting next month tries to come up with a new approach to the problem. But United Nations officials reject claims that the British colony's forced repatriation of 51 boat people on Tuesday violated international law regarding refugees. ''The 51 who were sent back were determined by the Hong Kong authorities as well as us to be non-refugees,'' said Raymond Hall, a spokesman for the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. ''There was no question of a violation of refugee law in that case.'' The meeting in Geneva on Jan. 18 and 19 is to be attended by representatives of more than 25 nations, including the United States, Vietnam, Britain and Southeast Asian countries. They make up a panel named at an international conference here in June to seek a new strategy to resolve the problem of the boat people. The committee has been deadlocked since its establishment, largely because of United States opposition to forced returns. Britain, which says the forced repatriations have been temporarily suspended, insists that the colony has no choice but to carry them out. At the June conference it was unanimously agreed that the Vietnamese should be screened and that those determined to be economic migrants and not legitimate political refugees should return to Vietnam. Those at the meeting agreed that refugees should be persuaded to return ''voluntarily.'' But participants could only agree to a vaguely worded proposition that ''alternative'' solutions should be found if voluntary repatriation did not work ''after a reasonable period of time.'' Amnesty International and other human rights groups have protested that the deportations should end because screening is not done fairly. United Nations officials share some complaints about the speed of the procedure and the quality of language interpretation for the Vietnamese. But they say Hong Kong officials have been improving the screening process. ''We have safeguards in Hong Kong which don't necessarily exist in other countries,'' said Dennis McNamara, deputy director of refugee law and doctrine at the High Commissioner's office. Under an agreement with the British colony, the High Commissioner's office has played a large role in screening the boat people. The United Nations criteria are based on a 1951 refugee convention that defines a refugee as anyone outside his or her country who has ''a well-founded fear of persecution'' on political, ethnic, religious or other grounds. Cases Subject to Review The United Nations has about 20 lawyers stationed in Hong Kong monitoring the screening and intends soon to increase the number to 35. Under an agreement with the British colony, the High Commissioner's office may review the cases of all Vietnamese determined by Hong Kong to be non-refugees. Whenever United Nations officials believe a determination is mistaken, they have the right to change that person's status to that of a refugee. Hong Kong is allowing those determined to be refugees to remain on its territory until they are resettled by a country of permanent asylum. About 8,000 of the nearly 57,000 boat people in Hong Kong have been screened so far, according to the High Commissioner's office. Eight hundred forty-one were granted refugee status by Hong Kong officials, and another 65 by United Nations refugee officials. Although the repatriations have been suspended by Britain, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has defended the practice and said it will continue. British officials have accused the United States of hypocrisy on the issue. In November, after a meeting with President Bush, Mrs. Thatcher pointed to the United States policy of intercepting boats filled with Haitian asylum-seekers and forcing them back to Haiti."
