"President Corazon C. Aquino told a rally here today to forget the past abuses of the military, and she indicated at a news conference that she might be ready to grant an amnesty to some of the soldiers who had committed human-rights violations. In a day marked by a tone of increasingly uncompromising support for ''my soldiers,'' Mrs. Aquino also told troops at a military camp that if a proposed cease-fire with Communist insurgents failed, ''we will embark upon the contrary course of war from which there will be no return except in victory.'' Mrs. Aquino said she was prepared to ''forgive and forget'' what she says she believes is the military's role in the 1983 assassination of her husband, Benigno, and she asked other victims of abuses to follow her example. A Shift in Position The statements seemed to indicate a shift in Mrs. Aquino's position away from her identification of people who felt like victims of the military. ''Before, when we were in the opposition, the military was our enemy,'' she told the rally in Cebu. ''But it is different now. They are really trying their best to protect the people. And we need in turn to support the military. We need to forget the past.'' Her references to her proposed cease-fire during a two-day trip to the southern cities of Davao and Cebu were marked by toughness and warnings to the insurgents of possible reprisals if the truce does not succeed. Asked about what the military has been calling a ''double amnesty'' that would forgive soldiers as well as the rebels they fought, Mrs. Aquino said at the news conference, ''If I am willing to give amnesty to rebels who have also in a sense fought not only the Government but fought also the soldiers, we will have to look at this probably on a case-to-case basis.'' 'Will Not Forget So Easily' Representatives of leftist and human-rights groups in the Philippines reacted with skepticism to her talk of forgiveness, saying they believed the victims of human-rights abuses would want to see justice done. ''I'm afraid the victims will not forget so easily,'' said the local representatives of the prisoners' rights group Task Force Detainees. ''Since Mrs. Aquino became President, they have been collecting evidence and looking forward to justice.'' A banner at the rally read, ''Justice for all martyrs and victims of state terrorism,'' and it depicted armed Philippine soldiers standing over an unarmed victim. Breakfast at the Barracks Mrs. Aquino began her day in Davao, on the nearby island of Mindanao, with an early-morning visit to a camp where she had breakfast with the armed forces Chief of Staff, Gen. Fidel V. Ramos, and his troops and admonished the soldiers to ''be humble, polite and fair'' in dealing with civilians. ''Never threaten, swagger or display cruelty or arrogance,'' she told the soldiers. A ranking officer at the camp said high military officials had expressed concern that troops still loyal to the former President, Ferdinand E. Marcos, might kidnap Mrs. Aquino or hold her hostage during her visit. One of the President's advisers confirmed there had been such concern. Col. Rudolfo Biazon, superintendent of the Philippine Military Academy and a former commander of the camp, dismissed the notion, saying he had told his superiors, ''You don't know your soldiers.'' #3 Groups of Insurgents At her news conference, Mrs. Aquino said she believed the insurgents were divided into three groups: those who want to come down from the hills and are asking only that their security be guaranteed; those who would, in addition, like assurances of programs of rehabilitation and job training, and the hard core less likely to surrender. After ''exhausting all peaceful means,'' and wooing back those insurgents who wish to surrender, Mrs. Aquino said, ''The military will be ready to fight force with force.'' Mrs. Aquino pledged in her campaign that she would seek a cease-fire and dialogue with the insurgents, and she said she hoped many would come down from the hills as result of Mr. Marcos's departure. But in the three months since she took office, encounters that are sometimes intense have continued with few surrenders, and the President said she had not made contact with the Communist leadership to discuss a cease-fire. Her remarks about the cease-fire Friday, on her first day in Davao, were strong and struck a balance of concern for the needs and sensitivities of both the insurgents and the soldiers. Her emphasis today was on the soldiers as she called for reconciliation and national unity. ''Let us not think anymore of what is for Marcos, what is for Cory,'' she told the rally. ''We have to be united for our country. Let us forget the past. Let us be one.'' ----Rebels Kill 8 Soldiers DAVAO, the Philippines, May 24 (UPI) - Rebels killed eight soldiers and wounded three today in an attack on an army detachment two hours before President Corazon C. Aquino arrived at a nearby camp to visit troops. Col. Douglas Rosete, quoting a field report, said 300 insurgents virtually wiped out the army detachment in an assault in the village of Mainit. Colonel Rosete said said local farmers reported that 30 of the insurgents had been killed and 17 wounded, but the report could not be confirmed."
