"More than two years after taking office on a platform that emphasized human rights, the Government of President Corazon C. Aquino has increasingly been accused of condoning violations of those principles. Partly as a result of pressure from the military establishment, the President has largely backed away from the issue, which had appeared to reflect one of her few deeply held philosophies of government. Although the military has complained of being hampered by excessive concern for human rights, few cases have been brought against abusive soldiers. The Government's Human Rights Commission has been largely passive. Its chairwoman, Mary Concepcion Bautista, said in a recent statement that ''in an environment of war - and this is the situation which exists between the insurgents and the military - it is most difficult, if not impossible, to completely prevent the occurrence of brutality and torture,'' she said. Vigilante Abuses Cited Her assertion came in response to the latest criticism, in a report this week by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, which is based in New York. The report focused on widespread abuses by civilian vigilante groups that have spread through the country as a new counterinsurgency tactic during Mrs. Aquino's tenure. ''In the past year, the human rights of Filipinos have suffered grave violations on a wide scale,'' said the report, which is based on months of research within the Philippines. The report said the military, in combating Communist rebels, ''has resorted to increasingly brutal methods,'' particularly in backing the vigilantes, who operate without direct accountability. The report said the Communists had themselves committed widespread human rights violations. It said more than 200 vigilante groups that have spread through the country during the Aquino presidency ''have tortured, maimed, mutilated, beheaded, shot and hacked to death people who they say support or sympathize'' with the rebels.  Aquino Debt to Military Seen These groups, often armed by the military, are bands of local volunteers with little training or supervision who patrol their communities to deny the insurgents a popular base. The report said the President's vacillation on the subject, and her ultimate support for the vigilantes, ''seemed to reflect the growing ability of the military to impose its views on the civilian Government.'' It said that Mrs. Aquino, ''increasingly indebted to her supporters in the military'' after a series of coup attempts within the armed forces, ''also grew increasingly deferential to their views on counterinsurgency strategy.'' Commenting on the report, the Deputy Defense Secretary, Fortunato Abad, said the vigilante groups were an integral part of the military's counterinsurgency strategy and indicated that there was little chance that the policy would be reversed. The lawyers' report followed a critical assessment this year by Amnesty International, and also reflected increasing criticism within the Philippines by the same rights groups that backed Mrs. Aquino in her campaign to oust Ferdinand E. Marcos. For example, the Free Legal Assistance Group, an association of rights lawyers from whom Mrs. Aquino drew some of her closest advisers, described what it called a worsening situation in an open letter to her last September. ''Arbitrary arrests and illegal detentions, disappearances, extrajudicial executions, food blockades, massacres, zoning operations and even chemical and conventional bombing of villages continue to occur with alarming frequency,'' it said. The group criticized the military's tactic of labeling human rights organizations as Communist fronts. Members of such organizations, including human rights lawyers themselves, are among the victims of the vigilantes as they seek to assert local control. ''You talk to any human rights lawyer, especially in the provinces,'' said William Chua, a lawyer who defends victims of abuses in Manila. ''During Marcos's time we were not as afraid as we are now. Things were more indirect. Now it's outright assassination.'' The deterioration is all the more striking because Mrs. Aquino, who came to the presidency with few fully formed ideas about government, was seen at least to be committed to justice and human rights. Her first decree as President restored the right of habeas corpus, and her first major gesture was the freeing of hundreds of political prisoners. But under the pressures of the presidency, particularly the threats by the military, Mrs. Aquino has fallen mostly silent about human rights."
