"Widespread torture persists in China and Government efforts to curb it are being thwarted by the police and Communist Party officials, Amnesty International said today. Most victims are criminal suspects who are beaten, whipped, hung up by the arms or assaulted with electric batons to force them to confess, the international human rights organization said in a report. It asserted that some victims had died as a result of torture and others had commited suicide. ''Their torturers are usually police officers or Communist Party officials or members of the many informal security units who illegally detain individuals they suspect of committing crimes,'' the report said. Convicted prisoners are sometimes severely ill-treated for breaches of prison discipline, and prisoners and detainees are cruelly treated as a method of punishment, humiliation or intimidation, according to the report. Information From Prisoners Amnesty International said its report was based on recent articles from the Chinese press and information from former prisoners, their relatives and other nonofficial sources. The report called for fundamental changes in laws, especially to limit the time a prisoner can be held incommunicado and to insure that detainees will go promptly before judges and have regular access to relatives. It said some prisoners have been held in solitary confinement for years with no contact with their families or fellow inmates, and some of these have lost their minds. Among the torture methods listed in the report were the tightening of handcuffs so they cut to the bone, the suspending of prisoners with both hands tied behind the back, around-the-clock interrogation, kicking and hair-pulling. Amnesty International said the mistreatment of prisoners had received unprecedented publicity recently in the state-controlled Chinese news outlets and that the move appeared aimed at restoring confidence in the police. But, it said, ''Amnesty International remains concerned that that circumstances in which torture is most likely to occur, such as incommunicado detention, illegal detention and some forms of administrative detention, still exist in China.'' Amnesty International gave no comprehensive figures on the number of people said to be tortured in prisons and detention centers."
