"In her first public declaration as President, Corazon C. Aquino today issued what she called Proclamation No. 1 restoring full protections against arrest without charges. She said the writ of habeas corpus, a symbol of human rights, was being restored because ''the Filipino people have established a new Government bound to the ideals of genuine liberty and freedom for all.'' Addressing hundreds of thousands of people at a rally, Mrs. Aquino called for the mobilization of what has become known here as ''people power'' into what would be in effect a new branch of government, raising issues and monitoring the performance of officials. An Outpouring of Joy She said new government structures would be formed to hear and act on recommendations and complaints of citizens, whose mass support provides the power base for a President who faces a potentially hostile legislature, court system and bureaucracy. ''I say to you, the holders of people power, if anyone in government does not listen to what you have to say, bring it to my attention through structures that will be set up for that purpose,'' she said. At the rally and elsewhere throughout the nation, Filipinos joined in a public outpouring of joy at the end of a week in which the nation believes it showed the world the meaning of democracy. [Page A6.] Lesislators to Meet Legislators from the party of former President Ferdinand E. Marcos planned an emergency meeting Monday to consider whether to nullify the proclamation of his victory in the National Assembly, where they hold a majority, the official Philippine News Agency reported. Mrs. Aquino also said evidence was being gathered, and government structures being created, to bring to trial ''those who have committed grave crimes against the people, like human rights abuses and stealing.'' In an interview Friday, she said the investigations by her government could result in the reopening of the case of the assassination in 1983 of her husband, Benigno S. Aquino, the political opposition leader. ''Magnanimity does not mean absence of justice,'' she said. ''I just wish to assure you that we are indeed attending to these matters.'' Prisoners Are Released In addition, she announced that of 484 detainees around the nation judged to be political prisoners, 480 had been released or were in the process of being released. The cases of the remaining four, including the reported founder of the Communist Party of the Philippines, Jose Maria Sison, were being dealt with, she said. Aides said they expected the four to be freed soon. The President, who has been in office for five days, spoke at what was billed as a thanksgiving mass for her victory. The Roman Catholic Archbishop of Manila, Jaime Cardinal Sin, said the mass and led a cheer of ''Cory! Cory! Cory!'' Mrs. Aquino's nickname. The Cardinal warned against ''premature euphoria,'' saying: ''There are those who want to slide back to the old and corrupt ways. There are those who plan to regroup the forces of dictatorship.'' ''The danger is not yet past,'' he said. ''We must continue to watch, work and pray.'' Appearing relaxed and confident before a huge and happy crowd reminiscent of those she drew during her campaign, Mrs. Aquino said, ''I have never felt prouder to be a Filipina.'' ''Twenty years of repression, injustice, corruption, greed, waste and near despair have finally ended,'' she said. ''They were ended by a revolution of peace, prayers, rosaries, radios and, above all, human courage.'' Dramatic Reading of Edict Mrs. Aquino's revocation of limits on the writ of habeas corpus restored for the first time since Mr. Marcos declared martial law in 1972 the protection for all Filipinos against summary detention or imprisonment. She presented her proclamation, with its symbolism of a renewal of human rights, in a dramatic reading of the full edict, replete with the legalistic language Mr. Marcos often employed in issuing decrees that restricted freedoms. The decree quoted the 1981 proclamations of Mr. Marcos, which immediately followed his formal suspension of martial law, suspending the writ of habeas corpus throughout the southern island of Mindanao, where insurgency is strong, and in the rest of the country in cases deemed to be political offenses. ''Whereas the proclamation and decrees mentioned, and all the related decrees, instructions, orders and rules were not warranted by the requirements of public safety since the existing rebellion would have been contained by government sincerity at reforms, by peaceful negotiations and reconciliations and by steadfast devotion to the rule of law,'' Mrs. Aquino read. ''Whereas instead of serving its purpose of supressing rebellion and other threats to national security, the suspension of the privilege of habeas corpus drove many to the hills and fanned the conspiracy to overthrow the government by violence and force.'' She therefore revoked Mr. Marcos's orders ''so that this guardian of liberty and freedom may be available to all.'' Four Will Go Free According to her executive secretary, Joker Arroyo, the proclamation means that the widespread practice of arrest without warrant or judicial process should cease and that arrested people will be guaranteed the right to challenge their arrest in court. He said that with the release of those judged to be political prisoners, it did not appear that any other people under detention would be affected by the restoration of habeas corpus. He also said he expected that the four prisoners whose cases remained under study would soon be freed. He said that their release was being delayed because of resistance from the military, but that Mrs. Aquino had decided to free them. Mrs. Aquino praised her listeners for their bravery in massing a week ago to protect troops challenging Mr. Marcos, under the leadership of Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile and the man who is now the armed forces' Chief of Staff, Gen. Fidel V. Ramos. The massing of civilians, who blocked tanks and infantry supporting Mr. Marcos, has come to be called ''people power,'' and hawkers at today's rally sold yellow T-shirts and buttons proclaiming both Mrs. Aquino and the power of the people she commands. New Challenges for People Having faced down Mr. Marcos's military forces, she said, ''people power must now turn its attention to the complex challenges of building our nation.'' ''I call on all of you to organize on the grass-roots level in your communities and villages, by interest group, by sector, and build organizations to turn the spontaneous birth of our people power into more permanent structures,'' she said. In making this call, Mrs. Aquino was playing to her strong suit as President, the overwhelming popular mandate that swept her into power despite Mr. Marcos's desperate attempts to use force and electoral fraud to remain in office. But her resort to this unorthodox and untested means of demonstrating power also illustrated her new Government's tenuous control of the institutions of government. The 13 justices of the Supreme Court, all appointed by Mr. Marcos, who have manipulated their rulings in the past at his bidding, have refused to comply with her demand that they resign. The National Assembly, which also carried out Mr. Marcos's will, holds the power to deny her a constitutional proclamation as President. Assembly's Motives Feared Even if it does decide to nullify its previous proclamation of Mr. Marcos and declare Mrs. Aquino the winner, some of her advisers fear that it could simply be planning to ''handcuff'' her by tying up her attempts at sweeping reforms in the legislature. Because of these potential difficulties, Mrs. Aquino said in an interview Friday that she was considering declaring what her advisers called a ''revolutionary government'' that would presumably nullify the present Constitution and the institutions it mandates. This would give her a clean slate on which to formulate a new constitution and build a government structure independent of the one built by Mr. Marcos during the years of martial law. In her speech today, Mrs. Aquino said a first task of ''people power'' would be to guard her electoral and post-electoral victory. ''The situation, while stable, is not totally under control yet,'' she said. ''There are still holdout pockets of military and civilian loyalists.'' Second, she said, ''all of us should serve as vigilantes and watchdogs over our government.'' ''I urge the people to watch over the government at all levels, from the President and Vice President to my ministers, all the way down to the lowest levels of the bureaucracy.'' A Warning to Officials To both civilian and military officials, many of whom still support the ousted Marcos Government, she issued a warning of the power she now controls. ''I remind you that we owe our mandate to our people and that they must be served,'' she said. ''Should organized people power take issue with any of us in government, listen to what they want to say, answer their questions, dialogue with the people. If we are at fault, let us correct ourselves, lest the people once again correct it for us, as they have shown in the past week they are capable of doing.'' Assuming a strong tone that showed how far she had traveled since her first, tentative, days as a candidate three months ago, Mrs. Aquino said, ''I will not tolerate deviation from the path we have pledged to follow.'' ''I will be uncompromising about corruption, graft, nepotism, usurpation and abuse of power and authority,'' she said, ''Also against extravagance, incompetence, abuse of human rights, and the guarantee of the basic freedoms of speech, assembly, thought and nonviolent action.'' Palace Open to the Public Addressing officeholders from the previous Government, she said, ''To those who have had to compromise under the old regime, turn a new leaf and follow this call to turn the Government into one that is believed, trusted and even loved by our people.'' Mrs. Aquino said Malacanang Palace, where she plans to hold office but not to live, would be opened to the public for visits. She said buses would be provided to bring poor people to the palace."
