"The decision by South Korea's President Chun Doo Hwan to end negotiations with the opposition on a new system of government, and to proceed with a presidential election on the basis of the existing Constitution, could jeopardize South Korea's future and impair vital American interests in Asia. The South Korean Government seems to believe that President Chun's willingness to leave office at the completion of his term in 1988 is sufficient to satisfy the democratic aspirations of the people. Yet South Koreans are not likely to accept ''Chunism without Chun'' as a substitute for genuine democratization. In view of the opposition's strong feeling that the current system of indirect Presidential elections is stacked against it, Mr. Chun's decision could well lead to huge protests by students and other alienated sectors of the population who want democracy now rather than at some indefinite time in the future. A recurring cycle of challenges to, and crackdowns by, the authorities would likely to lead to political instability, economic uncertainty and even a growing danger of war. Across the border, barely 30 miles from Seoul, lies hostile North Korea headed by Kim Il-Sung, who could view widespread disorder in the south as an opportunity to achieve his ambition of reunifying the Korean peninsula under Communist control. This potentially explosive situation is frought with peril for the United States. Some 40,000 American troops, who would instantaneously be involved if another war broke out, continue to stand watch along the 38th Parallel, a tangible manifestation of our formal defense commitment to the security of South Korea. Twenty billion dollars in trade flows between our two countries, making South Korea our seventh largest trading partner. South Korea is, in short, a country we cannot afford to ignore. It is, therefore, essential that a way be found to reopen negotiations between the Chun Government and the opposition. For it is only through such a dialogue that a national consensus can be achieved and that political stability, continued economic growth, and the preservation of peace can be assured. The South Korean Government, if it is sincere in its professed commitment to democratization, could move unilaterally to improve its human rights record. There is nothing to stop it from immediately removing constraints on the press, releasing all political prisoners, ending the torture of detainees and establishing an independent judiciary. By taking these actions, the Government would go a long way toward improving the human rights situation, but, equally important, such steps would generate the kind of trust and confidence on the part of the opposition that could facilitate an agreement on a broadly acceptable political system for the nation. The differences between the Government, which favors the establishment of a parliamentary system, and the opposition, which has insisted on a system of direct presidential elections, pose a serious political problem for the United States. Democracy, after all, can take many forms - presidential as well as parliamentary, federal as well as unitary, unicameral as well as bicameral. And it would clearly be inappropriate for Washington to express a preference for a particular democratic system, just as it would be inappropriate for us to endorse a particular party or candidate. These are matters for the South Korean people to determine for themselves. But given our interest in South Korea, it is entirely appropriate for us to express a preference for democracy over dictatorship, for tolerance over torture and for peaceful reform over violent revolution. Some skeptics have argued that democracy is not possible in South Korea. It is said that a Confucian heritage, with its emphasis on authority and obedience, is incompatible with a pluralistic civic culture. Others contend that the military threat from the North makes democracy a luxury that South Korea cannot afford. South Korea, to be sure, does have a Confucian legacy, but so does Japan, which for the last 40 years has maintained a free and open society. Moreover, even traditional Confucian systems recognize that rulers should be responsive to the needs of their subjects and accountable for their actions. Nor do the imperatives of national security necessarily conflict with the requirements of democracy. In peace and war, the United States, Israel and the countries of Western Europe have demonstrated not only that political pluralism can prosper in a hostile environment, but that by giving the people a greater stake in the defense of their country, democracy can actually enhance the security of a nation. In considering how the United States can help to bring about the establishment of democracy and a greater respect for human rights in South Korea, we need to understand the sources of our leverage as well as the limitations on our influence. Since South Korea is no longer a recipient of American foreign aid, we are not in a position to cut or condition such assistance as a way to move the Government in Seoul in the direction of greater democratization. Although we do have 40,000 troops in South Korea, it would be both inadvisable and imprudent to threaten their withdrawal. The presence of American forces in South Korea lends credibility to our defense commitment, while their removal would significantly diminish the deterrent value of our mutual security treaty, thereby increasing the chances of war. This is a view shared by South Korea's two leading opposition figures, Kim Dae Jung (who again is under house arrest) and Kim Young Sam, and by such prominent champions of human rights as Stephen Cardinal Kim, who believe that another war would spell the end of all their hopes for greater political freedom in South Korea. Still, by virtue of the important contribution we make to the security and prosperity of South Korea, we are not without influence in Seoul. What the United States says does matter to the South Korean Government and the people. Whether or not we succeed in our efforts to bring about a change in Government policy, it is essential that we make it clear to the South Korean people that we are on the side of democracy rather than dictatorship. One of the most disturbing developments for this close ally in the last few years has been the emergence of a vigorous and occasionally even virulent anti-Americanism. Already many South Koreans blame us for President Chun's illegal seizure of power in 1980. If they now conclude that we have acquiesced in Mr. Chun's recent decision to break off talks with the opposition, they may well hold us doubly responsible for their present political plight. This is the time, therefore, not so much for private persuasion as for public diplomacy. It would be very helpful for President Reagan to issue a statement, Secretary of State George P. Shultz to make a speech and Congress to adopt a resolution unequivocally proclaiming America's support for democracy and human rights in South Korea. It would also be useful if American military officers in South Korea were instructed to make it clear in all their dealings with their South Korean counterparts that they believe a politically neutral military supportive of democracy is critical to continued good relations between our two countries. As a way of lending substance to these declarations, we could also instruct our representatives at the multilateral banks to vote against further loans to South Korea in the absence of real progress on democracy and human rights. In view of South Korea's booming economy, this would not jeopardize the country's prosperity, but it would reinforce the credibility of our representations about democracy. In the final analysis, our ability to move the South Korean Government toward democracy and human rights may prove limited. But we must leave no doubt in the minds of the South Korean people as to where the United States stands. The future of South Korea and of Korean-American relations may depend upon it."
