"The diplomatic crisis between India and Sri Lanka, largely defused for now, has been a sideshow to the continuing deterioration of stability in Sri Lanka. Only seven years ago this country was being described as the potential Singapore of South Asia. These days, the potential model for Sri Lanka most often mentioned is Lebanon. ''Countries, unlike human beings, don't die,'' said a senior Asian diplomat with long experience here. ''They simply limp along, more and more slowly. Even if some form of peace should suddenly be fashioned tomorrow, the guns and the bitterness now prevalent throughout the society mean huge problems for at least a generation.'' What began as an ethnic insurgency of the Tamils, situated mostly in the north and east of the island, has brought in the Indian Army and engendered a fratricidal struggle among the Sinhalese, as well. The violence and widespread abuses of human rights in the north have spread to the south, disrupting the economy, further dividing rich and poor, ruining tourism and causing many Sri Lankans to seek to emigrate or leave public life. Economic Growth Dips The Tamils, mostly Hindu, are a minority, while the Sinhalese, largely Buddhist, form the majority. After nearly a decade of growth in the Sri Lankan gross national product of about 5 percent a year, diplomats say, the increase now is less than 1 percent a year. Hotels are largely empty. Strikes, killings and curfews are common. Universities have been almost entirely closed for two years. Countries that provide development aid to Sri Lanka may not even have their annual pledging meeting this year, a diplomat said, while at least $500 million already committed in aid cannot get to the country because of the security situation. Deaths and Political Terror Unlike the Tamil issue, the rise of the radical Sinhalese People's Liberation Front, or J.V.P., appears to present a clear and direct threat to the Government of President Ranasinghe Premadasa. Diplomats say that 30 to 40 people are killed from political terror on an average day in Sri Lanka, which has a population of 16 million. Human-rights lawyers, who continue to file habeas corpus petitions for people who disappear, think the vast majority of them have been killed, their bodies disposed of by security forces under an emergency regulation that requires no notification. More Petitions Filed Prins Gunasekara, a rights lawyer whose life has been threatened many times and whose junior colleague, Charitha Lankapura, was assassinated on July 7, estimates that least 500 people a month are ''disappearing,'' seized by security forces or vigilantes working for the security forces. In 1984, Mr. Gunasekara said, 42 habeas corpus petitions were filed. In 1986, the figure was 208; in 1987, 340; in 1988, 508. Through July of this year, he said, the number is 367. ''I doubt these petitions represent even 10 percent of the true number of cases,'' he said. ''They may represent only 5 percent.'' The Government is trying to combat the People's Liberation Front with state-sponsored terror, Mr. Gunasekara said, but is only succeeding in killing sympathizers, not cadres, thus embittering the population. 'On a Rising Curve' The killings by the front, however, he and diplomats say, tend to be carefully chosen targets - corrupt officials or informers - whose deaths bring little sympathy. The front is ''on a rising curve,'' diplomats say. Even if Mr. Premadasa succeeds in getting the 45,000 Indian peacekeeping troops to go home - undercutting one of the front's most popular issues - no one thinks it will go away, or give up on its main aim of toppling the Government. The front began as a legal, Maoist youth organization led by Rohana Wijeweera. It tried to overthrow the Government in 1971. The revolt was crushed with great loss of life, and the party was proscribed. President J. R. Jayewardene restored the front's political rights when he came to power in 1977. But in 1983, after anti-Tamil riots in Colombo that were widely believed to have been instigated by the Government, the front and three other Marxist parties were again banned and many arrested. Wide Sympathy Found The front has displayed superb organizational ability, diplomats say, and has caused significant disruption with a relatively small number of arms. It has fed on economic issues - unemployment and relative poverty - and has found wide sympathy among students, monks and soldiers. Three human-rights lawyers have been killed here in the last year. Mr. Gunasekara, a thin, elegant man of 65, refuses to have bodyguards, though a form of camouflage netting covers his office window. ''Matters are deteriorating,'' he said, ''but I'm still hopeful.'' Asked why, he shook his head and shut his eyes. ''Oh, because I am confident . . .'' -and here he broke off for many seconds, before giving his questioner an interrogative smile - ''in the good side of man?'' he finally said. ''In some idealism that still remains?''"
