"With deliberations paralyzed by the East-West quarrel over Poland, the Madrid conference on security and cooperation in Europe today witnessed some of the harshest Soviet-American exchanges since it convened 15 months ago. Max M. Kampelman of the United States said that military rule in Poland was reflective of ''a pattern of even greater repression in Soviet society.'' Calling abuses of psychiatry a violation of rights clauses in the 1975 Helsinki accord, he said Moscow was confining dissidents ''to the grotesque world of politically controlled psychiatric institutions, where they have been silenced through drugs and violated in a manner reminiscent of the Middle Ages.'' Sergei Kondrashev of the Soviet Union said the American was ''poisoning the Madrid atmosphere'' with ''inventions and infected sources.'' The Soviet delegation issued a news release saying that ''the refusal on the part of the NATO countries and, first of all, the U.S. delegation to engage in a businesslike and constructive work at the Madrid meeting may have serious consequences.'' It said the West was trying to ''sabotage the positive work'' of the conference, which has been reviewing the Helsinki accord, known as the Final Act. Mr. Kampelman accused the Soviet side of ''sheer hypocrisy.'' ''The Helsinki Final Act has been pummeled to near death by the Soviet Union,'' he said. ''Yet we hear the chirping 'Let's go back to work' by those who have been demonstrating by their actions their utter contempt for the Final Act and for our process.'' Signed by 33 European countries and by the United States and Canada, the nonbinding accord pledges signers to respect human rights and to conduct international relations without threatening or using violence. The United States has accused the Soviet Union of violating human rights provisions and other clauses of the accord, and Mr. Kampelman commented sarcastically on the Russians' plea for returning to ''work'' at the conference. ''The only work I have seen is work represented by the invasion of Afghanistan,'' he said, ''or the work of putting people in jail or psychiatric institutions. ''Are they offering more talk, more words on paper they will disregard? More promises they will not keep? Their words are useless in the face of their deeds against the Final Act. They are wrecking the Final Act.'' Since Feb. 9, when Western foreign ministers came here to assail Moscow and Warsaw over the declaration of martial law in Poland, the Western allies have ceased participating in working groups that had been drafting a final conference document. Their position is that the dismantling of the Solidarity union and the disruption of the liberalization trend in Poland are such major violations of the Helsinki agreement that further negotiations here are impossible at this time. The Polish delegation has been spirited in defending itself against Western attacks, and today its senior delegate, Wlodzimierz Konarski, said at a news conference that the imposition of martial law on Dec.  13 had not been inspired by the Soviet Union. He also sought to refute reports in the Western press that Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Polish leader, was cracking down on the powerful Roman Catholic Church. ''The Catholic Church, in particular, as well as the other communions in Poland have a significant role to play that is recognized by the Government through its policy of dialogue,'' he said. The Soviet-led Warsaw Pact group here has keyed many of its positions to a perception that West German public opinion is particularly eager to see the conference continue, and Mr. Konarski praised a visit to Poland last weekend by Herbert Wehner, the parliamentary leader of the West German Social Democrats and an advocate of detente. ''His visit to Poland has done more for Europe than many of the monologues of the NATO countries that we hear here in this hall,'' Mr. Konarski, asking for understanding of Poland's economic and political situation."
