"BRUSSELS, Jan. 4 (AP) - Following is the text of the communique on Poland issued today by the foreign ministers of the European Economic Community: BRUSSELS, Jan. 4 (AP) - Following is the text of the communique on Poland issued today by the foreign ministers of the European Economic Community: The Ten utterly disapprove of the development of the situation in Poland.  They have noted the declarations of the Polish leadership of its intention to maintain national independence and to re-establish in the near future liberty and the process of reform as well as resuming the dialogue with the various elements of the Polish nation.  Unhappily, the Ten must note today that, contrary to these declarations, what has taken place has not been dialogue but repression bringing with it violations of the most elementary human and citizens' rights, contrary to the Helsinki Final Act, the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declarations of Human Rights. The Te n the refore appeal urgently to the Polish authorities to end as soon as po ssible the state of martial law, to release those arrested and to resore a general dialogue with the church and Solidarity. Significance of Events The significance of these grave events extends beyond Poland itself. The inability of the system in Eastern Europe to accept the modifications necessary to meet the legitimate aspirations of the people is such as to endanger public confidence in the possibility of cooperative links with the East and thus seriously affect international relations. In this context, the Ten note with concern and disapproval the serious external pressure and the campaign directed by the U.S.S.R and other Eastern European countries against the efforts for renewal in Poland. This already grave situation would be further aggravated if it led to an open intervention by the Warsaw Pact. For this reason, the Ten wish to issue a solemn warning against any such intervention. The Ten are totally in sympathy with the Polish people and are willing to continue the direct humanitarian aid to them.  The Ten have taken note of the economic measures taken by the United States Government with regard to the U.S.S.R. The Ten will undertake in this context close and positive consultations with the United States Government and with the governments of other Western states in order to define what decisions will best serve their common objectives and to avoid any step which could compromise their respective actions. The Madrid Conference Developments in Poland constitute a grave violation of the principles of the Helsinki Final Act. The Ten therefore consider that the Madrid Conference should discuss them as soon as possible at ministerial level. The Ten will make approaches to the neutral and nonaligned states to propose an early resumption of the Madrid meeting. The Ten will work in the United Nations and its specialized agencies for a denunciation of violations of human rights and acts of violence. Other measures will be considered as the situation in Poland develops, in particular measures concerning credit and economic assistance to Poland and measures concerning the Community's commercial policy with regard to the U.S.S.R. In addition, the Ten will examine the question of further food aid to Poland. The Ten have called on the Polish authorities both nationally and through the presidency to lift the abnormal and unacceptable restrictions which have been placed on the work of embassies, representatives of the media, air services and other communications in Poland. The Ten will study what can be done to alleviate the situation of Poles outside of Poland who do not wish to return to their country under present circumstances."
