"To the Editor: Edgar Bronfman's call for repeal of the Jackson-Vanik Amendment (Op-Ed July 1), which ties U.S. trade benefits to Soviet compliance with a concrete and measurable international human right - the freedom to leave one's country - could not have come at a more unfortunate time. Only weeks ago, Soviet authorities put on display a puppet group of Russian Jews whom they designated ''The Anti-Zionist Committee of the Public'' and prompted its leaders to declare ''that no more Jews wished to leave the Soviet Union.'' In the very week Bronfman recommended unilateral U.S. concessions as ''a sign of good will,'' Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights Charles H. Fairbanks Jr. warned that this new Soviet committee is a part of stepped-up anti-Semitism campaigns which emanate from the central government ''that controls armies, university admission committees, courts, prisons and border guards.'' This is only further confirmation that the Soviet Union is the only great power since Hitler's Germany that exploits anti-Semitism as state policy. The Jackson-Vanik Amendment was one response to the impetus which Soviet anti-Semitism added to the desire of Soviet Jews to be repatriated to Israel, despite the great personal risks involved.  After its enactment, Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union rose from less than 1,000 a year to more than 51,000 in 1979. Exit permits have now been reduced to a mere trickle, but U.S. policy is no more responsible for this Soviet human-rights violation than it is for endemic Soviet anti-Semitism. It is unseemly to respond to Soviet threats of repression by instant calls to examine what America is doing wrong. All policies can stand periodic re-examination, which routinely happens in our free society, but surely repeal of Jackson-Vanik should not be offered as a unilateral sacrifice in the midst of a two-pronged Soviet anti-Semitic campaign - one against the Jews within its borders and another on the international stage of the United Nations. MORRIS B. ABRAM, Chairman, National Conference on Soviet Jewry, New York, July 5, 1983"
