"Among Soviet dissidents, Andrei D. Sakharov has always been special.  Nobody else has challenged the Kremlin on human rights from the lofty station he occupied when he made his first public criticisms 13 years ago. Generally, those ready to sacrifice careers and what there is of freedom have come from lesser castes in the Soviet hierarchy, their courage unblunted by the honor and privilege heaped on Dr.  Sakharov for his early work on nuclear weapons. Nor was he spurred into opposition by a personal experience of discrimination or repression, as were many others who struggled for basic freedoms. Dr. Sakharov's uniqueness has afforded him protection from the harshest Kremlin retributions. By the same token, it has earned him vilification greater than he would have suffered had he been less highly rewarded. Thus, while he escaped the path that leads from the Lyubyanka Prison to a Siberian labor camp - suffering instead the comparatively mild fate of banishment two years ago to Gorky, a grimy industrial city half a day's train journey from Moscow - his activities have earned him the sobriquet of ''Judas'' from the Soviet press and harassment beyond anything visited on more commonplace foes. Last week, Dr. Sakharov's special position made it possible for him to exact a concession that would have been unthinkable for ordinary Russians. After 17 days on a hunger strike, the last four spent in serious condition in a hospital, he was told that Yelizaveta Alekseyeva, the 26-year-old wife by proxy of his stepson, would be allowed to emigrate to join her husband in the United States. Dr.  Sakharov and his wife, Yelena G. Bonner, who had declared their fast on Miss Alekseyeva's behalf, were said to have ended their protest and to be ''in no danger.'' A week ago, when it announced that the Sakharovs had been taken to a hospital, the Government newspaper Izvestia depicted Dr. Sakharov as a friend of ''terrorist murderers,'' a reference to his statements on behalf of a group of young men whom he believed to have been mistakenly condemned for a Moscow subway bombing. The paper as much as promised that Dr. Sakharov's latest ''provocation'' would be rebuffed. When Soviet leaders then bowed to the physicist's demand, they evidently did so because they had concluded that he was serious when he foresaw a ''tragic end'' to the fast. The clearest message coming from the Kremlin recently has been the importance it attaches to saving the tattered fabric of detente. It seems to have recognized that the physicist's death under such unsavory circumstances would have dealt a devastating blow, not so much to relations with the Reagan Administration, from which Soviet officials expect little, but to Moscow's hopes of cultivating cozier ties with Washington's allies in Europe. In a sense, the Kremlin's calculations were easier to unravel than Dr. Sakharov's. Throughout the affair, the mood among his supporters in Moscow was less one of admiration than of sadness, and when the fast ended there was little celebration. One old acquaintance called him a ''saint'' for his selflessness in the past, but described the fast as a ''zhest otchayaniya,'' an act of desperation. Behind such remarks lay a sense that the Nobel Peace Prize laureate, celebrated for his bold advocacy of decency and freedom, may have diminished his campaign by taking such drastic action in support of what, measured on the scale of Soviet repression, seemed a marginal cause. That the fast was also an expression of personal anguish seemed certain. Friends who had seen Dr. Sakharov in recent months contended that he was as calm as ever, but some of the letters and statements smuggled out of Gorky suggested that the months of isolation had begun to unsettle him. In a statement to scientists abroad, he laid bitter complaints against colleagues from his 20 years of top-secret weapons research, accusing them of betrayal. ''I feel around me a wall of misunderstanding, indifference and passiveness,'' he wrote.  In his most recent letter, he combined a demand for personal relief with a restatement of his plea for Miss Alekseyeva. ''Our actions are a defense of my personal honor and worth and a protest against my illegal isolation,'' he declared. Other friends saw the fast as carefully calibrated. They said Dr.  Sakharov had chosen an issue he cared deeply about as a means of attracting worldwide attention to the thousands of men and women, including himself, who have been imprisoned or banished for crimes of conscience. From this standpoint, the fast was an overwhelming success, since it confronted the Kremlin with a demand it could meet and did so in a manner that reminded millions in the West of the harsh Soviet gulag. For some dissidents, the real value of the fast lay in the boost it gave to flagging morale. Ten years ago, when the flowering of detente spurred a mood of protest not seen here since the Bolshevik revolution, artists and writers and scientists gathered at the Sakharovs' cramped apartment on Moscow's busy Ring Road and debated late into the night about reform. Now, hundreds of trials later, a handful of those hopefuls are left, and their apartments are hung with photographs of friends they have seen shipped away to the camps. To them, Dr. Sakharov's stand in Gorky burned like a torch on a distant hill, and the limits of his victory seemed less important than the fact that the Kremlin had finally been forced into a concession. Judging from a cable to Miss Alekseyeva after the fast, Dr.  Sakharov's own reaction was more simple. ''We are happy beyond words,'' he said, referring to the Kremlin promise to let her go.  Nothing in the cable indicated whether he had thought of the personal consequences, but there seemed scant prospect that they would be good. In the past, the Kremlin has indicated it will never exile Dr.  Sakharov to the West, as some Western governments have urged.  Although his knowledge of Soviet weapons programs is badly outdated, powerful people are apparently convinced that he knows enough to do serious damage. For the present, there seems little chance that the Kremlin will agree to Dr. Sakharov's own preference, permission to return to Moscow. Soviet leaders have never looked sympathetically on anyone who embarrasses them. Some may even argue for tighter restrictions on the physicist's movements in Gorky. To be effective, these would have to include a total ban on contacts with relatives and friends in Moscow, who have seen to it that the physicist is still heard in the world. Whether the Kremlin is prepared to order such restrictions could depend, like the outcome of the fast, on its reading of public opinion in the West."
