"Is detente dead or just critically ill? That should become clearer on Tuesday when the 35 European and North American states that signed the Helsinki accords in 1975 gather in Madrid to examine all the broken and unfulfilled promises on security, cooperation and human rights. The international climate for the conference could hardly be worse. Soviet troops occupy Afghanistan. In Poland, the emergence of an independent labor union has unnerved other East European regimes and raised the specter of Soviet intervention. Fearful of catching the ''Polish disease,'' East Germany, in clear violation of the Helsinki agreements, has sharply limited visits by West Germans and Poles. Last month, 7,900 scientists and engineers from 44 non-Communist nations suspended relations with Soviet organizations to protest the persecution of colleagues such as Andrei Sakharov and Yuri Orlov, the imprisoned physicist who had tried to monitor Moscow's compliance with the Helsinki agreements. Last week, Mr. Orlov managed to smuggle out a statement from his labor camp in the Urals calling for a full discussion of Soviet human rights violations at the Madrid conference. In the message, passed to foreign correspondents by his wife, Irina, Mr. Orlov also said he would go on a hunger strike on the conference's opening day. Some Soviet Jewish dissidents plan a three-day fast to protest Government limitations on Jewish emigration. Detente Cuts Two Ways Western countries have taken their commitments to respect ''fundamental freedoms'' more seriously, but detente as defined in the so-called Helsinki Final Act is a two-way street. The Carter Administration's post-Afghanistan restrictions on the sale of grain and technology to Moscow are arguably violations of the accords.  Ronald Reagan, the President-elect, has openly questioned the value of the Madrid meeting. The value may be determined to a great extent by the agenda. The subject of heated debate since the preparatory session opened Sept.  9, it still was not resolved last week. The Soviet Union and its Warsaw Pact allies, fearing the conference will be turned into a pulpit from which the United States and other democracies denounce Communist sins against the Helsinki Final Act, are trying to limit the time devoted to reviewing compliance with the accords and to increase that alloted to introducing new proposals. Haggling over the agenda seems likely to run up to the 11th hour and could even leave the conference without an agreed agenda on opening day. The last two months of procedural wrangling are the surface signs of a profound divergence of perception on what Helsinki was all about. The idea of a Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe was originally a Soviet one, and Leonid I. Brezhnev saw the accords as consecrating Europe's postwar boundaries. The West demanded in return the final act's ''third basket'' on human rights, but nothing the Russians have done since Helsinki suggests they ever took these commitments seriously. ''There is a fundamental flaw in this Helsinki process,'' said the chief of one Western delegation last week. ''On the one hand, we think that the 'third basket' will lead to a gradual evolution, an opening of the societies of Eastern Europe - that broader human contacts, newspapers, journalists moving around freely, will slowly make them more liberal. On the other hand, we think that every few years we can meet, in Belgrade, in Madrid, and assail the Communist states for not respecting human rights - in other words, for not evolving as we think they should toward democracy. And that makes them ever more intransigent and fearful of the Helsinki process.'' From the perspective of the Communist elites that rule the Soviet bloc states, the human rights ''basket'' has become positively subversive. After the accords were signed, small Helsinki monitoring groups sprang up throughout the Esatern bloc; one by one, the authorities have dismantled them, suggesting deep uneasiness. Some Western European diplomats believe that the Soviet Union has decided that it must fundamentally revise, or even scuttle, the Helsinki process to muffle the emphasis that Western countries want to give to the jailing of dissidents, the invasion of Afghanistan and the jamming of foreign radio broadcasts. The worst-case scenario for the forum would have the Madrid gathering break up without having fixed the time and place for the next review. Rumania has already offered to be the host. The death of the Helsinki process - which might symbolically be taken as the death of detente -would upset West Europeans, especially West Germany, and demoralize neutral Yugoslavia and Finland which see ongoing dialogue in the Helsinki context as a guarantee of their sovereign independence. Failure would also be a sharp blow to human rights campaigners in Eastern Europe. The gloomiest interpretation of Soviet behavior among delegates here is that the Kremlin has decided that a military ''solution'' in Poland is probably inevitable and does not want to have a full-dress conference on detente under way as Soviet tanks rumble into Warsaw. Optimists argue that the Helsinki platform is still interesting and useful to the Russians. At a meeting last month, the Warsaw Pact states announced their desire to see the Madrid meeting followed by one to discuss disarmament in Europe. One aim of this longstanding Soviet project is to ban the enlargement of existing military blocs, which would effectively keep Spain from joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The Warsaw Pact communique also hinted at receptiveness to an old French idea for a post-Madrid disarmament conference that would begin by discussing confidence-building measures such as prior notification of military movements. It had been conventional wisdom in Madrid that, even in the preparatory phase, the Soviet Union would attempt to split the United States from its Atlantic allies. But, by taking a hard-line stand, the chief Soviet delegate, Yuri Dubinin, has produced the opposite effect. A newer bit of conventional wisdom is that the election of Ronald Reagan, who has never been much of a fan of detente, will open fissures in the NATO camp. Differences may eventually emerge, but, on the eve of the Madrid conference, the tentative prognosis is that the Western alliance remains considerably healthier than detente."
