"The United States said today that the Soviet Union had ''dishonored the principles'' of the rights accords signed at Helsinki five years ago. The Administration pledged to press for Soviet compliance at a review conference in Madrid in November. Outlining the goals for the conference, President Carter and Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie reproached Moscow in separate speeches to representatives of groups interested in rights issues. ''When I became President, I emphasized our commitment to human rights as a fundamental tenet of our foreign policy,'' Mr. Carter said. ''That commitment is as important to me today as it was then.  It is as central to America's interests now as it was when our country was born.'' In Helsinki in 1975, 35 states signed an accord on East-West cooperation that outlined principles in the rights field. At a followup conference in Belgrade in 1978, disputes arose over alleged Soviet rights violations, and from what Mr. Carter and Mr. Muskie said, a similar conflict is likely in Madrid. Violation Seen in Afghan Moves ''The behavior of the Soviet Union, in particular, has dishonored the principles of the Helsinki accords, both inside and beyond its own borders,'' Mr. Carter said. He said the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan ''can no more be reconciled with the Helsinki pledge than it can with the Charter of the United Nations.'' ''At home, as well, Soviet authorities have intensified their repression of the freedoms they pledged at Helsinki to promote,'' he said. Mr. Carter said that the banishment of Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and human rights advocate, from Moscow to the city of Gorky ''is the best known but sadly not the only instance of such violations of the Helsinki accords.'' ''More than 40 courageous men and women are now in prison or exile because they worked in private groups to encourage the Soviet Government to live up to its Helsinki pledges,'' Mr. Carter said, addressing the rights group at the White House. Mr. Muskie, speaking to the same group at the State Department earlier in the day, said the United States would ''press for progress on human rights''at the Madrid conference. Carter's Rebuts Reagan's Point He said the United States would also explore the possibility of further measures to ease military tensions in Europe. However, he added: ''We will not permit discussions of security at Madrid to overshadow or in any way diminish the attention paid to human rights.'' Ronald Reagan, the Republican candidate, raised questions in June about the value of going ahead with the Madrid meeting. Mr. Reagan said that if American athletes were being asked to boycott the Olympics, the diplomats might be better off avoiding Madrid. Mr. Carter, without mentioning Mr. Reagan by name, said that such reasoning is ''confused.'' ''There will be no medals awarded in Madrid,'' Mr. Carter said. ''It is not a wrestling match or a gymnastic tournament for diplomats. What it will test is the progress made on the international agenda of security and cooperation and the firmness of the principles by which the 35 participants agreed to be bound.''"
