"In an emotional speech to an audience that included survivors of Nazi genocide, President Reagan said today that the United States should not negotiate with any country unless the subject of human persecution is ''on that negotiating table.'' After the speech, a White House spokesman said Mr. Reagan had not Transcript of remarks, page A10 meant to alter his policy of playing down the rights issue in foreign relations. Nor did Mr. Reagan mean to warn the Soviet Union, which has been accused of human rights abuses against Jews and others, that the resumption of direct negotiations would be linked to rights issues, according to the spokesman, Larry Speakes, a deputy press secretary. Mr. Speakes said he was explaining Mr. Reagan's remarks on the President's instructions after having gone to him for clarification of his statements to 350 people associated with the President's Commission on the Holocaust. The commission, which was set up in 1978 by President Jimmy Carter with Elie Wiesel, the author, as chairman, has called for the construction of a national memorial and a museum to honor the millions of Europeans killed by the Nazis in World War II. Mr. Reagan's statement and the clarification were part of a series of confusing foreign policy signals that emerged during a somber ''Days of Remembrance'' ceremony in the East Room of the White House, where six candles were lighted in tribute to the six million Jews killed in German death camps. For example, Mr. Reagan did not mention Israel in his remarks after other speakers had called on the United States to assure Israel's security. Mr. Speakes said the oversight was without significance, since the President's commitment to Israel is ''obvious in his mind.'' Mr. Reagan, making his most prolonged public appearance since he was shot on March 30, appeared moved by the ceremony. His eyes glistened at times, his voice was husky with emotion, and he thumped the lectern with his forefinger to to emphasize his remarks on human rights. ''Theodore Roosevelt said that the Presidency was a bully pulpit,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''Well, I, for one, intend that this bully pulpit shall be used on every occasion, where it is appropriate, to point a finger of shame at even the ugliness of graffiti and certainly, wherever it takes place in the world, the persecution of people, for whatever reason - persecution of people for their religious belief - that is a matter to be on the negotiating table or the United States does not belong at that table.'' Meeting to Explain Remarks The remark triggered alarm in the West Wing, according to a staff source, and a meeting was immediately convened about ''what was said, what was meant and how it would be read.'' The procedure was like the one followed in the 1980 campaign, when Mr. Reagan's broad declaration or chance remarks created controversy before his aides explained his statements. ''I think to help you interpret that,'' Mr. Speakes said today of the remark on persecution, ''the President was not saying that this subject must be placed on the agenda before we proceed with discussion with another government. It's a general principle and I think this declaration of the President would provide a backdrop for any discussion that we might have with another government.'' Opposition to persecution is ''a basic and long-standing tenet of U.S. policy,'' he said. The spokesman added that his explanation was based on a face-to-face conversation in which Mr. Reagan was asked about the meaning of his remarks. ''I wanted to be absolutely sure what the man was saying and now I'm sure,'' Mr. Speakes said.  Another White House official said that Mr. Reagan had departed from his prepared text and was speaking extemporaneously when he made his remarks linking the persecution issue to international negotiations. Today's events touched on sensitive concerns in foreign affairs, because of relations with the Soviet Union, and in domestic politics, because of the Administration's recent brush with an allegedly anti-Semitic organization. Mr. Reagan's remarks linking the rights issue to international negotiations came a day after Edwin Meese 3d, Mr. Reagan's adviser, said there was a prospect of a meeting some day with Leonid I.  Brezhnev, the Soviet leader. In domestic politics, today's appearance before the predominantly Jewish audience was part of White House efforts to present Mr.  Reagan's sensitivity to minorities and human suffering. Mr. Reagan evidently also sought to use the occasion to separate himself from the Liberty Lobby, an allegedly anti-Semitic group from which he had tried to select a sub-Cabinet officer. The nomination was withdrawn after it was reported that the Liberty Lobby regarded the Holocaust as a myth by the Jews. ''I am horrified today,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''that there are actually people now trying to say that the Holocaust was invented, that it never happened, that there weren't six million people whose lives were taken cruelly and needlessly in that event, that all of this is propaganda.''"
