"The United States strongly accused the Soviet Union and its allies today of continuing violations of human rights; the delegate from Moscow forcefully rejected the charges. The clash came during a session of the East-West conference. It was the sharpest in months, despite an agreement announced Friday on a broad compromise to end the nearly three-year-old conference on East-West relations in Europe. The exchange was touched off by a speech of the chief American representative, Max M. Kampelman, to the 34 other delegations in the meeting, which was closed. He recited examples of what he called repressive actions against human rights and peace advocates throughout the Soviet bloc, condemned the 1979 Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and the 1981 imposition of martial law in Poland and charged that ''the repression of human being in the Soviet Union is greater than at any time since the Helsinki accords were signed in 1975.'' 'The Most Unworthy Speech' Midway in the speech, the Soviet delegate, Sergei A. Kondrashev, interrupted, calling Mr. Kampelman's statement ''the most unworthy speech ever heard at Madrid.'' The Soviet delegate said the American was ''casting the nastiest possible aspersions on a participating state'' and termed the speech ''confrontational, unworthy, falacious, injurious and an insult to the pan-European process.'' The Russian demanded that Mr. Kampelman be ruled out of order on the ground that he was not discussing the final document of the conference. But the chair, held by France, recognized Mr. Kampelman's argument that the speech was germane to the question of compliance with the document and the American was allowed to go on. The Soviet protests were followed by denunciations from East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria and Poland. The Polish delegate added a charge that the United States, by continuing economic sanctions against Warsaw because of martial law, was guilty of interfering in its internal affairs. No Threat to Accord Is Seen Despite the tone of bitterness, delegates said the exchanges did not indicate that the compromise, arrived at after so many hours of tedious negotiations, was under any threat. Despite a last-minute hitch caused by a demand raised by Malta, the delegates still expect a final document to be adopted shortly and to be signed with ceremonial flourish by foreign ministers in early September. Instead, Mr. Kampelman's speech was read as a political sign from the Reagan Administration that agreement in Madrid did not mean United States-Soviet relations were necessarily going to enter a trouble-free period, or that Washington was going to let up its pressure on Moscow on human rights. In this context, delegates noted that Mr. Kampelman conferred with President Reagan about the Madrid agreement last week and won his approval. Kampelman Testifies Thursday Mr. Kampelman is to testify Thursday before the Congressional Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe. He is expected to emphasize the agreement's human rights provisions, which are somewhat more specific and stronger than those in the 1975 Helsinki accords.  But he may also have to defend the compromise because it fell short of what Western nations had been demanding. In this spirit, Mr. Kampelman described the agreement as a modest advance, and emphasized that deeds counted more than words. ''We cannot in good conscience permit a limited negotiating success, important as we believe it to be, to make us forget, much to our regret, that signatures on a document do not necessarily produce complilance with its provisions,'' he said. Among the violations he cited were a sharp cutback in the permitted level of emigration of Jews from the Soviet Union. The document, in the Western view, provides some limited improvement in the rights of religious worshipers, labor unions and foreign journalists. It pledges actions against terrorism."
