"The Madrid conference on human rights and cooperation in Europe was saved from collapse today as the United States and the Soviet Union accepted a compromise agenda. A two-month Soviet filibuster over the ground rules for the conference en ded shortly after 5 P.M. as Deputy Foreign Minister Leonid F. Ily ichev announced at a packed closed meeting that his Government ha d approved the agenda. ''We have heard the voice of the peoples,'' Mr. Ilyichev told reporters after the session. ''And the peoples want peace.'' Earlier, in a speech at the conference, the Soviet official attacked criticism of Russian intervention in Afghanistan as ''interference in the internal affairs'' of the South Asian nation. ''We have what we need,'' said Max M. Kampelman, the Washington lawyer who led the United States delegation through the marathon, roller-coaster negotiations, which several times in the last three days appeared to be about to break down. ''We're happy, very happy.'' Reaction on Afghan Issue Earlier, in what Western delegates called a restrained speech, Mr.  Ilyichev declared that he had ''strong feelings of indignation and bafflement'' yesterday when Griffin B. Bell, the head of the American delegation, attacked the occupation of Afghanistan and human rights violations in Communist Europe. The Russian delegate called the former Attorney General's speech ''a clear-cut interference in the internal affairs of the Soviet Union.'' The bulk of his speech promoted a longstanding Soviet proposal for a conference on disarmament in Europe. One of the Soviet purposes for such a meeting would be to keep Spain from joining the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Mr. Ilyichev dismissed ''the so-called Afghanistan question,'' which has been raised by a series of Western foreign ministers here, as outside the purview of the Madrid meeting. ''It is now high time to see the futility of interfering in the internal affairs of Afghanistan,'' he said. The agenda dispute masked a Soviet attempt to sharply reduce the time to be devoted to questions such as Afghanistan, the jamming of radio broadcasts and the jailing and harassment of political dissidents in Eastern Europe. The Russians sent out implicit warnings they were prepared to sabotage the conference if discussion entered the contentious area of human rights too often.  Mood Said to Be Poisoned Although all delegations applauded today's accord, some West European diplomats said in private that the bargaining had soured the mood. ''The Soviets have completely poi soned the atmosphere,'' one French envoy said. ''We didn't need nine and a half weeks of negotiations to arrive at this.'' The document put forward last night by the Foreign Ministers of Austria, Cyprus, Sweden and Yugoslavia will allow five weeks for discussion of compliance with the 1975 Helsinki accords - the Soviet Union had at one point insisted on two weeks - and in the fifth week allows proposals for advancing detente. NATO countries and nonaligned and neutral nations had insisted that there be another review conference in several years, while the Soviet Union wanted to keep this question open. The compromise slightly weakens the commitment to a follow-up meeting. The collapse of the Madrid conference would have been a heavy blow to detente and, some Western diplomats felt, a major reversal in Soviet foreign policy and a sign that Moscow had decided to tighten its hold on its Warsaw Pact allies. The accord, Mr. Kampelman said, ''confirms the view that a number of us have had that the Soviet Union wanted the meeting, and if they wanted the meeting they had to go along with the proposal.''"
