"ONE DAY LAST SUMMER, my family and I were wandering through a small museum in Concord, Mass., when we came to a diorama depicting the historic clash between British redcoats and American colonists at North Bridge. There, on a miniature landscape, toy soldiers faced each other across a tiny battlefield at the opening of the American Revolution. My 8-year-old son, Michael, pointed to one of the little redcoats that had been tipped over on its side. ''Look,'' he said, ''a dead Russian.'' Then he caught himself, laughed and shook his head at his slip. ''I mean, British soldier.'' After 11 years of living overseas, our family had returned to the United States only one year before, but Michael had quickly absorbed a view that has become as American as the shot heard 'round the world: The Russians are the enemy. The concept has worked its way into our culture. The Russians have taken their place in film, advertising and popular literature beside the images of cruel Nazis and the earlier, sinister stereotypes of Chinese and Japanese. They are vilified by our Government leaders as militant aggressors devoted to conquering the world. Their reciprocal fears of us are usually ignored in the textbooks that introduce American teen-agers to world affairs. And often, at a deeper level, we use the Russians to define ourselves. All nations have a way of demonizing their adversaries. And so do we, picturing our values as antitheses of the Russians' - our freedom, their slavery; our wealth, their poverty; our honesty, their deceit; our righteousness, their subversion; our peaceful intentions, their warlike militarism; our robust private enterprise, their stifling state socialism. The Soviet Union has given us plenty of reason to think the worst, of course - as a brutal prosecutor of some of its own dissidents, a bully in Eastern Europe, a trainer of terrorists, an arms merchant in tense regions of the world, a nuclear power with a revolutionary ideology. Much Soviet behavior has been inimical to American interests and offensive to American beliefs. But as I return now to my own society after a long absence that included four years in Moscow, I am struck by how incomplete our portrait of the Russians is, how much of a caricature we have drawn, how thoroughly the shadings and nuances and rich subtleties of Soviet society have escaped us. The gaps in understanding were revealed in a telephone poll conducted by The New York Times of 1,277 adults across the country between Sept. 15 and 19 (page 37). FOR MANY AMERICANS, IMAGES OF RUSSIA ARE DOMINATED BY THE FAMIL-iar events of political oppression and international tension. And because the Soviet system is undemocratic, giving the Russian people no real voice in selecting leaders or making policy, the people generally don't play a large role in our perceptions. We tend to imagine Russians as hostile to the regime that governs them - while overlooking the antidemocratic impulses that find deep roots among ordinary Soviet citizens. The terrible reign of Stalin is fixed in our imaginations: his forced collectivization of Russian farmers, and particularly his madness in purging the Communist Party and sending millions of innocent people to prison camps and firing squads. Ultimately, this disillusioned even most of those Americans who had initially seen hope for human justice in Soviet socialism. Moscow's actions after World War II crystallized our sense of the Soviet Union as an adversary. Communist parties were installed in Eastern Europe. West Berlin was blockaded in 1948. Missiles were sent to Cuba in 1962, then withdrawn only under an American ultimatum. Hungary was invaded in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968 and Afghanistan in 1979. The Helsinki accords of 1975 were violated as dissidents were arrested and most emigration was barred. Poland was induced to put down its free trade union, Solidarity, with martial law in 1981. The record justifies our suspicion and outrage. But as a consequence, the political conflicts have overwhelmed our perceptions, obscuring the character of Soviet life. Most Americans rely on the news - and especially television news - which is shaped by momentary political events, not the longer-range, subtler elements of culture, tradition and attitude. That kind of information is available in books, scholarly journals and the best newspapers, but it takes second place in the popular imagination to the daily drama of international politics. The easy news is all negative news, and for that you don't have to get up from your television set. Indeed, news coverage of the Soviet Union, especially on television, tends to be dominated less by the knowledgeable correspondents in Moscow than by the frequent, scary pronouncements of officials in Washington on the Soviet threat. Important national perceptions can be shaped by a well-turned phrase or dramatic image, even when the underlying facts are in doubt. Describing Soviet intentions, for example, President Reagan recently used a quotation that he ascribed to Lenin: ''We will take Eastern Europe. We will organize the hordes of Asia. And then we will move into Latin America and we won't have to take the United States; it will fall into our outstretched hands like overripe fruit.'' It turned out to be a phony, contained in a 1958 book by Robert Welch of the John Birch Society. There is a great paradox here. Although Soviet society is largely closed and only partially visible to us, our freedom enables us to learn much more than the Russians themselves know about Soviet history and current affairs. In an open society, the facts are available to anyone who wants to dig through the serious writing. But more immediate and ubiquitous sources of information are more easily distorted by political fads and insidious stereotypes. The resulting misperceptions seem less a function of politics than of emotion, less rooted in the various positions Americans occupy along their political spectrum than in their mythologies about the nature and intentions of the Soviet Union. Indeed, as the recent Times poll showed, many misperceptions are held across political lines - by Republicans and Democrats, conservatives and liberals, voters for Ronald Reagan and for Walter Mondale. The profound ideological conflict between the two countries transcends the divisions of American politics. It sometimes even affects personal behavior. Russians who visit the United States are generally received with the same courtesy Americans are offered in the Soviet Union. But some contacts have been laced with tension. For the last two years, James E. Hill, who teaches high-school history in Claremont, Calif., has been conducting an informal experiment, putting on a Russian accent and giving the official Soviet viewpoint on a range of international issues, including the Soviet argument on behalf of peaceful coexistence with the United States. College audiences usually treat him well, but high-school students and adults often erupt in rage. ''They say, 'We won't have peace with you unless you change and live like us,' '' Hill reports. At Edgewood High School in West Covina, a suburb of Los Angeles, teachers walked out of his lectures. When he sat down in the faculty lunchroom, some teachers got up from the table and walked away; others moved to the far end. When a class of Soviet diplomats' children was scheduled to visit the Arlington Middle School in the Poughkeepsie, N.Y., area, a few American youngsters on the morning buses were overheard planning to harass ''the Commies,'' according to Jane Barley, a former teacher of Russian who supervises some of the language programs for the New York State Education Department. Perhaps their remarks were a variation of the slogans now seen on T-shirts: ''Kill a Commie for Mommy.'' But the pupils involved were spoken to, and the visit occurred without incident. At the Titusville Middle School in Poughkeepsie, Jane Barley said, a mother refused to let her son sign up for Russian language, arguing, ''We would never let him study Russian. We're Christians.'' THE BASIC OBSTA-cle to understanding is lack of knowledge. Polls show that Americans are not very well-informed about other countries, and the Soviet Union is no exception. Of those interviewed in The Times survey, 51 percent said that they had no desire to visit the Soviet Union. Yet those of us who have returned from Moscow find intense curiosity about life there -enough to put books on the best-seller list and light up switchboards during talk shows on the subject. Many Americans also seem ready to have their stereotypes revised. Russian-language study has never been very popular in the United States, and courses in Soviet studies have attracted relatively small enrollments. The number of public secondary-school students taking Russian swelled to a high of 26,716 in 1965 -only two-tenths of 1 percent of the total student population -and dropped steadily thereafter to 5,702, or four one-hundredths of 1 percent, in 1982. An opposite trend has been visible at the college level, with a rise from 1980 to 1983 of 26.7 percent in the number of students taking Russian. As Soviet-American tensions have grown, so has the interest in graduate study of Soviet affairs. The W. Averell Harriman Institute for Advanced Study of the Soviet Union at Columbia University had 182 applicants for the current academic year, up from 43 for 1980-81. The Russian Research Center at Harvard, which a decade ago received 30 to 50 applications for its masters program, saw 100 students apply for 15 places last year and 90 this year. At Middlebury College in Vermont, which has long enjoyed a fine reputation in Russian-language instruction, a new Soviet studies program has begun to attract significant numbers of undergraduates. An average of more than 200 books and 2,500 articles a year are written by Americans about the Soviet Union. Some 40 full-time American correspondents reside in Moscow - one of the largest American press corps in the world. Legions of American academic experts sift the Soviet press, monitor Moscow television, talk with Soviet officials and publish learned analyses in scholarly journals. And yet little of this information filters down to the general public. Understanding is pockmarked with blank spots. Of those polled in The Times survey, for example, 76 percent were unable to name Mikhail S. Gorbachev as the top Soviet leader. Historical knowledge was weak, especially in areas that weigh heavily on Russians' views of their relationship with us. Forty-four percent of the Americans surveyed did not know that the Soviet Union and the United States had fought on the same side in World War II; a smaller number within that group - 28 percent of the whole sample - thought that the two countries had actually fought against each other. Only 42 percent knew that more Russians than Americans had died in the Second World War, and just 14 percent were aware that in 1918, the United States landed troops in northern and eastern Russia along with the British, French and Japanese to bolster anti-Bolshevik forces in the civil war that followed the 1917 Revolution. Part of the fault can be found in an assortment of history textbooks used in junior and senior high schools. Some mention the American intervention in passing, although many ignore it entirely. In their account of World War II, many are almost mirror images of their Soviet counterparts, minimizing the Soviet role in combating Hitler's Germany just as Soviet books reduce the American role. (Box, page 56.) Soviet texts place the Soviet Union at the center of the war, playing down the Pacific theater, portraying the battle of Stalingrad as the turning point, and castigating the United States for delaying its entry into the fighting, while the American books usually focus on the United States' role as decisive and the Normandy landing as the critical moment in the Allied effort. ''Freedom's Trail,'' an American history text published by Houghton Mifflin, for example, passes quickly over the Soviet-German fighting: ''In June 1941, Hitler attacked the Soviet Union. So the United States sent lend-lease supplies to help the Soviet Union fight Germany.'' The book mentions neither the battle of Stalingrad nor the extent of Soviet suffering. Only a note printed in the teacher's edition recalls that an estimated 20 million Soviet citizens died. ''Exploring a Changing World,'' a junior-high-school text published by the Globe Book Company, also gives America credit for much of the Soviet victory. ''The Germans were very successful,'' it declares. ''But with the help of the United States, the Soviets stopped the German armies.'' Stalingrad is recalled, but without reference to the heavy Soviet losses. This parochialism surprises Russians who come here. ''America is a rather isolated country in a way,'' observed Vasily Aksyonov, a dissident Soviet writer who immigrated to the United States five years ago. ''I have even had to tell some people that Russia is located between China and Germany. They know that this is some terrifying power, but they don't know where.'' Spy novels, films and advertisements reflect and reinforce stereotypes. Soviet spies in some thrillers are sympathetic individuals caught in the wheels of ruthless bureaucracy, and some films, such as ''The Russians Are Coming, The Russians Are Coming'' of 1966 and the recent ''Moscow on the Hudson'' portray individual Russians in warm tones. But vicious and absurd caricatures of Russians have become standard fare in a current genre of commercials and films. These have had a major impact on American teen-agers, as I discovered when I went home to Chatham, N.J., the town where I grew up. AT CHATHAM HIGH School, an upper-middle-class public school, I spoke with two groups of about 40 students each, one drawn from honors 11th- and 12th-grade history classes, the other consisting of sophomores and juniors at mixed levels. I began by asking what words entered their minds when they thought of ''Russians.'' The images came in a flood: Flight 007, Reds, Communists, vodka, not real, stubborn, nuclear war, cold, Siberia, gulag, trapped, nervous, programmed, strict, Olympic boycott, Berlin, Iron Curtain, K.G.B., enemy, Afghanistan, roulette, oppression, workers, regimented, hammer and sickle, chess, sports, defectors, strong-willed, wheat, propaganda, Socialist, Kremlin, long lines, absenteeism, Lenin, Cuba, Hitler, grain embargo, Marxism, Poland, terrorism, cold war. When I asked for more about the Russian people, they added: emotionless, ignorant, naive, afraid, sadness, paranoid, ugly (later retracted by the boy who said it), alcoholics, gray, poor, strange, deprived, brainwashed, old-fashioned, spies, bravery, survival. Most American prejudices were contained in these words, and they pervaded both the honors and non-honors classes. A similar harshness emerged from The Times poll, whose respondents most often mentioned Communism, enemies, nuclear war, aggression, invasion, world domination and other threatening terms. Only 6 percent of those polled had positive thoughts about the Russians, ranging from ''people like us'' to ''World War II allies'' to sable, caviar and the like. Even admirable traits are stained by political hostility. In polls since 1942, Americans have consistently labeled Russians ''hard-working,'' and 56 percent of the Times survey's respondents thought Russians worked harder than Americans. While some explained that they were really criticizing the ''lackadaisical'' American worker, others held an exaggerated picture of gloom and hardship in the Soviet Union. Some thought, erroneously, that all Russians were assigned their jobs and worked in near servitude. ''I believe they really don't have much choice in their jobs or career,'' said a 35-year-old dragline operator for a strip-mining company in Pennsylvania. ''I don't believe there is a situation there for vacations, holidays and leisure time,'' he added. ''The Russians, in order to eat, have to perform a certain number of tasks for the Government. They are harder workers because they are forced to be.'' A 34-year-old actress, college graduate and Reagan voter from St. Louis thought the Russians put in ''way more hours'' than Americans and that ''they are allowed only one pair of shoes a year. I would not be very happy working for that one pair of shoes, knowing that's all I could have.'' This is a dramatic misimpression of the Russians, whose habits on the job -with occasional exceptions -make the Soviet Union one of the world's greatest goof-off societies. Workers are virtually immune from dismissal, no matter how poorly they perform. The eight-hour day and the five-day week are normal features of Soviet life, as are holidays and vacations, of course. Long vacations and extra pay are offered as a way of attracting workers to the tough climate of Siberia. Given the country's labor shortage, low-skilled Russians have considerable latitude about the kind of job they take. Those with higher education are on narrower tracks, but with some free choice; they are usually able to select their areas of specialization before beginning their studies, and upon graduating from college are assigned three-year positions in their fields. When a 1981 Roper Poll presented Americans with a choice of terms to describe Russians, practically every response was far off-target, in my experience. The Russian people were seen as aggressive and competitive, disciplined, insensitive and mean. Only 3 percent thought they were cheerful and fun-loving and had a sense of humor. Anyone who has lived in the Soviet Union would find these stereotypes utterly unrecognizable. To the extent that one can generalize about a nation more diverse than we care to realize, Russians are warm and compassionate, more complacent than competitive, more unruly in their souls than disciplined. What may be happening here is that Americans, encouraged by their own films and advertising, are confusing politics with personality. You have to know Russians personally, and preferably in the cloistered privacy of their own apartments, to know the warmer side of them. A funny, nonsensical television commercial for Miller Lite beer, for example, shows a Soviet emigre extolling the virtue of America, which he says has parties everywhere. In the Soviet Union, he adds, you don't find the parties, the Party finds you. This disparity between the public and private Russian came to the surface in Chatham High School, where one student called Russians ''emotionless.'' When I asked him why, he gave an interesting answer. Watching Soviet athletes on television, he never noticed any expressions on their faces. ''If they win, you expect them to be happy,'' he said. ''Their athletes always look like they're upset all the time.'' The comment drew objections from other students, especially a couple who had met Soviet citizens personally. ''I find it hard to stereotype such a large country as being emotionless,'' one boy declared. A girl in the class then spoke movingly about a visit to the Soviet Union with her father, who sang in the Yale Russian Chorus. She was only 10 at the time, but remembered visiting a Russian family at home. The experience remained deeply engraved in her feelings. ''In their homes they're very emotional people,'' she said. ''On the street they're just being careful. This facade of being so cold and so hard is just a facade.'' That is precisely right, and it's a shame that Soviet authorities don't realize how much good they could do for American perceptions by opening up a little. Officialdom's suspicion of infectious foreign influence makes most Russians wary of inviting Americans home, so even tourists who travel briefly to Moscow often come away with an image of Russians in their public posture - cold, unfeeling and rude. Others go too far in the other direction, making the wondrous discovery that the Soviet Union is a real country with real people who eat, sleep, brush their teeth and love their children. This can produce gushing, naive declarations about how we really don't have any conflicts at all. One Harvard student, participating in a recent PBS television discussion, delivered herself of a perfectly wide-eyed appreciation. ''When I got a chance to go I was really excited by the fact that they are just people,'' she said, ''and they walk in the street and they talk and act just like people, like us. There were times when you could have just limited contact with people, and you could get an old woman on the street to smile at you if you did something that she thought was good.'' Who can argue with her? The sun also rises over Moscow from time to time. O UR IMAGES OF THE RUS-sian people as individuals reflect and reinforce the sense that Soviet society as a whole is bleak, regimented and wholly controlled from above. A recent television commercial for Royal Crown Cola, for example, begins with ranks of Soviet citizens in gray, Stalinesque tunics, their faces impassive as they stand in Red Square facing a stern leader who admonishes them to drink Coke and Pepsi. The scene then shifts to a cabin in the wintry countryside, where jovial Russians in old-fashioned Cossack costumes dance, sing and make merry with RC - until the door bursts open, two black-hatted secret policemen appear and the main reveler hides his RC Cola inside his coat. The caricature of Soviet society as the ultimate in totalitarianism is widespread in American advertising, films and political cartoons. Even the film ''Moscow on the Hudson,'' which compassionately portrays individual Russians, contains an absurd scene in which a Russian family sitting at home grows alarmed when the hero starts talking about American jazz and singing some tunes. ''I know we'll get arrested for sure,'' one man says. Similarly, an ad mailed out this autumn by Time-Life Books for a volume on the Soviet Union shows a full color picture of a uniformed Soviet schoolgirl holding an AK-47 assault rifle. The bold print declares: ''Powerful. Defiant. Alert to every threat . . . .'' Only in fine print is the girl identified as an honor guard at a war memorial. Inside, the blurb asks the reader to imagine himself as a Russian in Moscow, standing at a street corner and checking his impulse to curse at a speeding limousine as he notices a possible informer nearby. ''No Party bigshot is worth a trip to Siberia.'' The ad invites the reader to discover ''what life is really like inside a country where nothing -absolutely nothing - goes unnoticed under the unblinking gaze of the omnipotent state.'' But life in the Soviet Union is not that way. Nor is it portrayed that way by the book itself, which is an excellent, fair-minded examination. The advertisement, in reinforcing the Stalinist image, ignores the extensive changes since Stalin's death in 1953. Although the structure of oppression remains intact, people do not disappear into Siberia for the relatively minor offenses of grumbling or telling political jokes; usually it takes an overt and deliberate act of dissent to provoke a political arrest, and lesser deviations mean lesser punishments, including the forfeit of material privileges, travel to the West and the like. ''It is not a totalitarian state,'' said Vasily Aksyonov, the dissident writer now living in Washington. ''There is a second level full of confusion, full of idiocy, full of black markets, full of debauchery.'' Soviet authorities reinforce the totalitarian image by persecuting highly visible, respected human-rights activists such as Andrei D. Sakharov and Anatoly B. Shcharansky, and by harassing and sometimes arresting Soviet Jews who want to study Hebrew, practice their Judaism or immigrate to Israel. The anti-Jewish oppression touches a powerful nerve in the United States, particularly for many American Jews whose parents or grandparents were born in Russia, came to this country and left their children and grandchildren with a legacy of gratitude and a sense of obligation. Rallies, newsletters and lobbying efforts on behalf of Soviet Jewry convey a justified sense of passion and outrage to large numbers of influential Americans. For the most part, descriptions of Soviet life in American textbooks are frozen in the Stalinist era, when masses of Communist Party officials and others were arrested and shot ca-priciously. Few books update the picture, and when they do they are sometimes attacked by conservative groups who want them banned from schools for being too gentle with the Russians. One such text, used in Chatham, N.J.; Montgomery County, Md., and elsewhere, is ''Unfinished Journey: A World History'' by Marvin Perry. In 1981 it was dropped from the Alabama State Board of Education's approved list mainly for its passages on evolution and organized religion, but also because it noted that ''under Communist leadership the Soviet Union had been transformed into a modern nation in record time.'' ''Both sides have inundated their populations with malicious propaganda for a long time,'' said Stephen F. Cohen, a professor of Soviet politics and history at Princeton University. Among the resulting misperceptions he lists the notions that ''the Soviet elite is utterly monolithic because all Communists think alike,'' that ''every Soviet leader is strong,'' that ''there is no real politics in the system - it is a kind of an administrative despotism.'' This last perceptual problem stems partly from the public struggle between dissidents and the state, which creates an appearance of politics while the real politics, the jockeying among constituencies for resources and priorities, takes place behind the closed doors of Soviet officialdom. A final misperception holds that the regime has no legitimacy in the eyes of Soviet citizens. ''Most Americans don't think of the Soviet system as having a social contract with its people,'' Cohen observed, citing the mistaken notion that a vast population of Russians detests its system and Government. Fifty-eight percent of those questioned in The Times survey thought Americans were more patriotic than Russians because, as one explained, ''I don't think they are too proud of what they stand for, and their economy and life style is more of a grind.'' In fact, as Americans who have lived in the Soviet Union have usually come to realize, a broad consensus seems to exist between the rulers and the ruled, one that transcends the widespread grumbling about shortages of goods and services, the acerbic political jokes, the yearning for material artifacts from the West. Despite their mediocre living standards, Russians have a feeling of economic security, an appreciation for the cradle-to-grave welfare that distinguishes their system from what they are told is the chaotic uncertainty of life in the United States. The importance of this in Russian minds rarely seems to leave its mark on American perceptions. The characteristic is far from comforting, and may lead us to miscalculation if we assume that Russians form a captive nation yearning to be free. In The Times poll, 49 percent of those surveyed thought the Communist Party would lose a free election in the Soviet Union while 40 percent thought it would win; 51 percent thought that most Russians disliked their system and would prefer a democracy, while 35 percent believed that most preferred strong leadership and would not be attracted to democracy. Asked which they imagined the average Russian would choose, more consumer goods or more political freedom, 62 percent guessed more freedom and only 29 percent said more goods. After four years in the Soviet Union, my hunch is the opposite on each question; I came away convinced of the Russians' discomfort with weak leadership and of their aversion to the West's pluralistic array of political ideas. That realization comes hard. It is a view of Russian political impulses that has only gradually and recently begun to gain acceptance among American academics, as Robert Kelley, a professor of history at the University of California at Santa Barbara, discovered upon his return from a semester of teaching at Moscow State University in 1979. When he described Russians' affinity for order and unanimity and their desire for a strong hand at the top, his colleagues ''simply recoiled in disbelief,'' he recalled. ''I remember being accused of being brainwashed when I said this at a faculty seminar. It seems to me that if I were coming back from Moscow now I wouldn't have the problem. People now are ready to accept this idea.'' The academic world is as susceptible to fads as the population at large. It swings from one popular concept to the next. For many years following the launch of Sputnik in 1957, the Soviet Union seemed to have won the scientific and technological race with the United States. Soviet education seemed invincible, American schooling inferior. Now the coin has been flipped, and Soviet society is more widely seen as economically incompetent, technologically hopeless, gripped by imminent crisis and possible collapse. ''Why?'' asks Stephen Cohen, who has become a gadfly within his profession of Sovietology. ''We hate the system and we want it to go away, and we know we can't make a war against it. So we want it to commit an act of self-abolition. It would solve our problems.'' AT A CERTAIN level, American antipathy toward the Soviet system satisfies our own need for a villain. And the villain is an abstraction, an all-purpose enemy that often has little to do with the Russians themselves. Thus it is in ''Red Dawn,'' John Milius's World War III film that was popular briefly in the summer of 1984. The scenario plays to the wildest fears and fantasies in American society: An invasion force of Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan troops takes over the western part of the United States, shoots up a school, murders townspeople and herds men into a concentration camp. A few high-school students escape with guns into the mountains, where they organize themselves into a band of guerrillas called the Wolverines, attacking Soviet soldiers, convoys and bases in a satisfying orgy of violence that ultimately helps overcome the sinister occupiers. Virtually all the Chatham students who had seen the film liked it, identified with the Wolverines and enjoyed the idea that a bunch of kids like them could kill a lot of Communists. ''It kind of made you feel good,'' one boy remarked. ''You came out hating the Russians.'' Another boy added: ''Americans went through Vietnam and suffered terrorist attacks. People are sick of America always being wrong. Americans are sick of that. They want the movies to kick their butts around.'' Only a few in the honors class criticized the film as absurd, scary and bloodthirsty. The specter of a Soviet takeover will also be exploited by ABC television in a 16-hour miniseries called ''Amerika'' scheduled for broadcast during the 1986-87 season. Set a decade after the United States has fallen to the Russians without a fight, the program portrays a materially deprived and politically fearful America run by vil-lainous Soviet agents. A K.G.B. colonel will be drawn as a sympathetic character saddened by America's departure from its own values. But the damaging potential rests in the film's reliance on the debatable assumption that the Soviet Union is out to conquer us. Donald Wrye, the program's writer, producer and director, conceded that most experts his staff consulted ''held the opinion that this could not happen.'' But his plan to sketch a United States as something akin to Vichy France under the Nazi occupation seems likely to encourage those Americans who like to see Soviet Communists behind every unwelcome opinion and development. If the Russians began producing films and television shows about a conquest of the Soviet Union by the United States, we might rightly accuse them of whipping up hysteria, anti-American hatred and international tension. And we would have some reason to fear the effects on their population, as we ourselves might now worry about the influence of this genre of entertainment on young Americans. The Chatham High School girl who thought of Hitler when the word Russians was mentioned explained that both regimes treated their people similarly - an idea formed from the images of Nazi-like Russians that appear increasingly in American films. ''Rambo: First Blood Part II,'' in which an American superfighter goes into Vietnam in search of American POW's, announces the arrival of Soviet officers with a closeup of their black jackboots. The Soviet interrogator, a Lieut. Col. Podovsky, speaks English with a German accent; his precise manner, erect posture and cool sadism make him a carbon copy of Hollywood's typical Nazi S.S. officer. The ruthless Russians torture Rambo with electric shocks, threaten to burn out an American prisoner's eye with a red-hot knife blade, shoot an escaping POW in the back. As Rambo's helicopter seems to spin out of control, there is a searing shot of the satisfied face of a Soviet pilot, set in a cold, malicious grin. All this could be dismissed more easily if it did not have such an impact. When I asked one group of Chatham students who their heroes were, they listed Rambo and the Wolverines along with President Reagan, General Patton and the United States Marines. OUR CONFRONTA-tion with Soviet society is something of a confrontation with ourselves. Any thoughtful American who lives for a time in Moscow comes away with insights into his own fears about the darker sides of his political personality, questions about integrity, courage, principles, values. Some Americans who have read the chapters of my book on Soviet children learning hypocrisy and Soviet adults practicing political charades see aspects of American society there. At a seminar for Middlebury alumni last summer, several retired corporation executives said that they recognized the American business world in my descriptions of the Soviet drive for conformity. We need an external villain to attack, an image, perhaps, of that villain we suspect lurks inside ourselves. The Russians fill the role conveniently, partly because they are in a real ideological conflict with us. At their cores, our two countries are both evangelical; each is possessed by what it conceives as the most righteous political and economic system in human history, and each is convinced that spreading its system would benefit all mankind. Each proselytizes out of its national interest, creating a mixture of ideological vision and military power that makes a potent chemistry. Our images of Russia tend to define a certain intellectual orthodoxy in American Sovietology. Some on the political right, such as Polish-born Richard E. Pipes, a professor of history at Harvard, see the consensus as ''slightly left of center,'' as he put it. Others believe that academic debate about the Soviet Union is focused by the political climate of the moment, that as American attitudes have moved to the right, ''the aperture of permissible discussion'' has moved right as well, in the phrase of Michael MccGwire, formerly a British naval attache in Moscow and now a specialist in Soviet military affairs at the Brookings Institution in Washington. ''It's like a spotlight,'' he said. ''In Russia, you have a spotlight of permissible discussion, but it's fixed. In America, it swings.'' Nevertheless, knowledge about the Soviet Union breeds neither affection nor unanimity among the American experts. They are fascinated by the Soviet system but rarely attracted to it. They argue among themselves about Soviet intentions and military capabilities, disagreeing on the most basic questions of whether Moscow is inherently aggressive or defensive in its motivations. Many students and experts dislike the Soviet system. ''That isn't necessarily bad,'' said Marshall D. Shulman, director of the Harriman Institute at Columbia. ''If you train somebody who knows all the negative sides of it, he may be a better reporter, he may be a better negotiator than somebody who is pro-Soviet. The objective shouldn't be to make everybody pro-Soviet.'' The penalty for straying beyond the beam in the United States is to be ignored, according to John Steinbruner, head of foreign policy studies at Brookings. ''It is exceedingly difficult to get people to hear what you're saying if you're outside of that,'' he said. Being outside these days means arguing that the Soviet Government is complicated, makes decisions the way most organizations do -in a chaotic and disorganized way - and operates mostly defensively to hold onto what it has. The contrary assumption - that, despite its economic weaknesses, the Soviet Union is a logical, dedicated, expansionist enemy - ''is the governing theology of the age, like the tenets of faith of the 14th century,'' Steinbruner declared. ''It's easy to be an apostate.'' There is a danger that if we accept our amalgam of images as the entire reality, we cannot deal with the real Russians; we can deal only with our own fears. Still, as I stood in my old high school, I saw a scattering of students in the honors classes whose questioning skepticism set them apart from the crowd. I had come back to my cloistered, homogeneous town wondering whether I would find the mirror image of a group of Moscow teen-agers I once met. They were youngsters of the elite - well-scrubbed, patriotic leaders of Komsomol, the Communist Youth League - who thought their country was the font of all virtue and the United States the focus of evil. They were comforted by the certainty of simplicity, and they reminded me of my hometown, in which the world had seemed neatly divided into good guys and bad guys. The only heroes the Soviet students could think of were Lenin and Che Guevara, and some of the Chatham youngsters were equally conformist. But the few questioning Chatham kids were quite different from those Komsomol kids in Moscow - and from most of their peers in Chatham - for their heroes included more than models of toughness. They mentioned Martin Luther King, John F. Kennedy, Bishop Desmond Tutu, Gandhi. They had a long list of wrongs to set right in the world, a more searching and self-critical list -poverty, crime, racism, hunger, the nuclear threat, and so on - than the Soviet students had given me. They were ready to learn."
