"To the Editor: Your Aug. 9 editorial ''Soiling the Altar of Freedom'' is a fair and thoughtful commentary on a complex and painful issue - Armenian terrorism. An earlier Op-Ed article on the same subject (July 29) by Robert Tembeckjian and Edward Costikyan, two prominent Armenian attorneys, accurately reflects the view of most Armenians that terrorism dishonors the memory of the hundreds of thousands of Armenian victims of the genocide. What is missing from both your editorial and their article is mention of the curious position taken by the United States in the past year. The August 1982 edition of the State Department Bulletin appended an astonishing footnote to a signed article about Armenian terrorism. The footnote stated that the historic record of the period (World War I) was ''ambiguous'' and that therefore the United States Government could not endorse the ''allegation'' of genocide leveled against Turkey. Ensuing protests compelled the State Department to retract the footnote, but the damage had already been done. It gave credence to Turkish references that the genocide was an ''alleged'' historical event - references which your editorial rightfully condemned.  The Government of Turkey has launched a major campaign of historic misinformation which coldly rejects any guilt or responsibility on the part of its Ottoman predecessors. Its Washington embassy has engaged prominent public relations firms to help whitewash the historic record.  Armenians are justifiably incensed when the Reagan Administration, ignoring the voluminous body of evidence in the Government's own archives, abets Turkey's public relations schemes. This stance is unworthy of America's historic role during and after the Armenian genocide.  American generosity, public and private, helped gather, shelter and feed the survivors. Thousands of them, including my own parents, found their way to these shores. They were forever grateful that America provided them the opportunity to begin a new life free from persecution and the threat of massacre. MILTON C. GELENIAN,Washington, Aug. 12, 1983"
