"Chancellor Helmut Schmidt of West Germany, for the first time directly criticizing Soviet i n volvement in the Polish crisis, joined President Reagan today in expr essing concern about ''the serious pressure'' brought by Moscow ag ainst Polish efforts forchange. Mr. Schmidt's comments about the Russians were milder than those uttered by Mr. Reagan and other American officials. But they were welcomed by Reagan Administration officials as a signal that West Germany was prepared to join with the rest of the alliance in possible steps against the Soviet Union if the crisis persisted in Poland. NATO Ministers Meet Monday Mr. Sch midt said in a news conference later in the day that the foreign minis ters of the Atlantic alliance would discuss future movesat a meeting next Monday in Brussels. In a communique issued after several hours of talks, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Schmidt said they ''agreed on their analysis of the Polish situation.'' ''They noted that contrary to the undertaking of the Polish leadership to re-establish liberty and the process of reform, repression and violation of basic human rights in Poland continues,'' the document said. Mr. Reagan and Mr. Schmidt discussed the American sanctions imposed on Poland and the Soviet Union and the West German decision to hold in abeyance further economic aid to Poland. Issue to Be Raised in Madrid As to additional steps, the joint statement said they had agreed that the Madrid follow-up conference on the Helsinki accord, now in recess until February, should deal with the Polish situation ''as soon as possible.'' The Helsinki accord of 1975 includes provisions for European security, East-West cooperation and civil rights. It also said that the two countries would take unspecified action within the United Nations framework ''with a view to denouncing the violation of human rights as well as acts of violence.'' The two leaders repeated the West's call for the end of martial law in Poland, the freeing of prisoners and the renewal of a dialogue involving the authorities, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Solidarity labor movement. ''They both noted the responsibility of the Soviet Union for developments in Poland and expressed concern about the serious pressure it is bringing to bear against Polish efforts for renewal,'' the statement said. ''They insist Poland be allowed to resolve its problems without external interference.'' Of the Western European allies, West Germany until now has been most reticent about holding the Soviet Union responsible for the crackdown in Poland. Mr. Schmidt said on Sunday that he felt Gen.  Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Polish leader, had acted primarily out of nationalist interests to save his country. At the end of today's meeting, Mr. Reagan said to reporters, with Mr. Schmidt standing next to him: ''I emphasized my belief that a tangible alliance response to the Polish crisis must be made now. Should we fail to insist that the Soviet Union stop pressuring Poland directly and indirectly, the gravest consequences for international relations could ensue.'' Schmidt Endorses Comments Mr. Schmidt, without referring directly to the Russians, said: ''Ladies and gentlemen, I can fully subscribe to what your President just told you about the contents and results of our discussions.'' At the news conference, which was held in the New Executive Office Building, Mr. Schmidt was asked whether he and Mr. Reagan had agreed on the extent of Soviet involvement in Poland. ''Yes, we did agree on the fact of Soviet pressure,'' he replied, '' and it doesn't mean a great difference if someone thinks that General Jaruzelski and the Polish military acted because of an imminent threat of Soviet intervention by force or acted as the result of Soviet pressure to act. It doesn't matter. In both cases, it is obvious the act would not have taken place without Soviet pressure.'' When asked whether Mr. Reagan had asked him to follow the American sanctions against the Soviet Union, Mr. Schmidt said, ''No.'' He also said that the American opposition to the West European plan to build a pipeline to import natural gas from Siberia was not mentioned by Mr. Reagan. American officials said their concerns were raised in lower-level meetings held by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher of West Germany and other officials. Mr. Schmidt and Mr. Reagan were joined in their talks by their foreign ministers and by William P. Clark Jr., the newly named national security adviser. Helmut Schmidt's current trip to Washington has been different.  There were pickets at the White House, critic ism of him in the press and none of the usual praise of Bonn's steadf astness. Washington Talk, page A16."
