"Following are excerpts from a statement Friday by Max M. Kampelman, the chief United States delegate to the Madrid follow-up meeting to the 1975 Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe: Introduction and Summary The 35 states participating in the Madrid C.S.C.E. review conference, after almost three years of negotiation, are approaching agreement on a final document. This conclusion meets the Western criteria for an acceptable, balanced and substantive result. It confirms and expands upon the original Helsinki Final Act of 1975.  The United States is pleased at the result and believes that the 2 years and 10 months spent negotiating in Madrid have been fruitful and well worth the extraordinary effort. There follows a summary followed by an outline of the issues that have dominated the Madrid meeting, as well as a report on how the final document deals with those issues: - The Madrid concluding document will add important new provisions to the Helsinki Final Act of 1975. These provisions deal with the rights of workers to organize, with human rights, with Helsinki monitors, religious rights, human contacts and family reunification, access to diplomatic and consular missions, information, rights of journalists and measures against terrorism. - It also provides for convening a Conference on Security and Confidence Building Measures and Disarmament in Stockholm next year to work out detailed measures to reduce the fear of surprise military attack. - In addition, the Madrid agreement schedules a series of additional meetings which are to take place over the next three years. - Finally, the Madrid Conference will agree to convene the next follow-up meeting in Vienna in November 1986 in order to carry forward the review process begun in Belgrade in 1977-78 and continued in Madrid. One of the most important aspects of the C.S.C.E. process is the opportunity it provides for a thorough review of the implementation of the Helsinki Final Act. During this review in Madrid, there was general condemnation of the failure of the East European states to live up to their Helsinki commitments, with special criticism of the Soviet and Polish Governments for their policies of internal repression and, in the case of the U.S.S.R., its interference in the internal affairs of Poland and Afghanistan. The establishment by the Madrid concluding document of a whole series of supplementary meetings will insure that this critical attention to the behavior of the Soviet Union and other Eastern European governments will continue during the next three and onehalf years. Those experts' meetings and the Vienna follow-up conference will insure that any state's failure to live up to the undertakings made in Madrid and in Helsinki will again attract the full spotlight of public attention. Implementation Review The Madrid Preparatory Meeting, which began on Sept. 9, 1980, and did not end until after the main meeting opened on Nov. 11, 1980, a period of more than nine weeks, focused on Western demands that discussions of new proposals on how best to strengthen the Helsinki process should be preceded by a review of how the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act of 1975 were being implemented. The agenda finally produced by the preparatory meeting provided that opportunity. The period of Nov. 11 to Dec. 19, 1980, was set aside for that review, and it was a thorough one. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the record of human rights violations in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe were explored and recorded in meticulous detail. Continuing Soviet and other Eastern violations of the Helsinki Final Act made it necessary to extend this review of implementation throughout most of the Madrid deliberations. The final document acknowledges that this review took place, that the review is essential to the health of the process and that there must be an improvement in compliance. The United States is fully aware of the fact that the Helsinki Final Act cannot attain its objectives when certain states, particularly the U.S.S.R., continue to violate its provisions. There are no enforcement mechanisms under the act. The Madrid meeting has been, therefore, the appropriate forum at which to insert political and moral pressure into the process. The implementation review became the mechanism. The fact that it was efficiently undertaken by a united Western group of states, joined by most of the neutral and nonaligned states, made that possible. Equally important, Madrid's implementation review afforded the opportunity for a large number of the participating states to communicate to the Soviet Union their deep concerns about violations of the accords. The message was clear: ''Conform to the promises made in 1975 if you wish to be recognized as a responsible member of the international community.'' Even as the pattern of Helsinki Final Act violations by the East continued, the United States took note of certain specific acts responding to Western concerns. The decision by Rumania on its education immigration tax is an illustration. The suspension of some aspects of martial law in Poland and the release of Lech Walesa is another, although continued arrests and imprisonment of thousands and the continued outlawing of Solidarity put the bona fides of those steps into question. We have also noted and welcomed a few gestures from the Soviet Union and will continue to encourage further such steps. Poland The imposition of martial law in Poland in December 1981 was a gross violation of the Helsinki Final Act even as the Madrid meeting was in session. This act of blatant defiance was met by a determined and unified presence of 20 Foreign Ministers, including United States Secretary of State Haig, during the week of Feb. 9-12, 1982. From Feb. 9 until March 12, 1982, negotiations at Madrid came to a complete halt as the West refused to engage in ''business as usual'' and instead detailed the Helsinki violations represented by Poland's martial law and continued repression in the Soviet Union. On March 12, 1982, in recognition of Western determination, the Madrid meeting recessed for eight months. When the meeting reconvened on Nov. 9, a group of Western states introduced a series of 14 amendments to a proposed compromise put forward by a group of neutral and nonaligned states. The amendments were designed to reflect the view that ''business as usual'' remained impossible. The essence of many of these proposals was incorporated in a revised neutral and nonaligned document, submitted on March 15, 1983, after martial law was ostensibly and technically suspended.  That revised document, with improvements to it produced by the Prime Minister of Spain on June 17, 1983, has become the official Concluding Document of Madrid. A number of provisions of that document reflect our Polish concerns. They deal with trade unions, religious freedom and the renewed obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force. The United States and its Western allies never forgot during the course of the Madrid meeting that among the first of Solidarity's demands in August 1980 was that the Helsinki Final Act be reprinted and widely disseminated in Poland. Trade Unions The Helsinki Final Act of 1975 did not include any language on trade unions. The Madrid document reflects a Western initiative stemming directly from the suppression of Solidarity in Poland. It clearly states that participating states ''will insure the right of workers freely to establish and join trade unions, the right of trade unions freely to exercise their activities and their rights as laid down in relative international instruments.'' This, of course, clearly refers to the conventions of the International Labor Organization. Monitors The Helsinki Final Act of 1975 provided a very clear basis of legitimacy to the courageous men and women who formed Helsinki monitoring groups within their own countries. Their purpose was to keep watch on how their states were complying with the provisions of the accords, a right they had under the 1975 agreement. In deliberate decisions to violate the provisions of the act, authorities in the U.S.S.R., Czechoslovakia and elsewhere in Eastern Europe persecuted and imprisoned those who exercised that right ''to know and act upon their rights.'' The language on monitors in the Helsinki Final Act is quite clear and should not require elaboration. We were, however, able to incorporate language which, in some slight measure, further supports the legitimacy of monitor groups and other activities. In the introduction to the section on principles, for example, a sentence reads: ''The participating states express their determination to encourage genuine efforts to implement the Final Act.'' This Concluding Document also states that ''governments, institutions organizations and persons have a role to play'' in that endeavor. We have no illusions as to Soviet intentions in this important human rights area. Our own determination must, however, always remain clear. Our insistence - in this case with some success - on continuing to improve the original wording of the act is a clear indication of that intent. It is also important that we keep raising the standards for responsible international behavior. Religion The Madrid final document makes small but important gains over the Helsinki Final Act in religious freedom: - By extending and strengthening Principle VII to provide that states will ''take the action necessary to insure the freedom of the individual to profess and practice, alone or in community with others, religion or belief.'' - By language stating that participating states will ''further implement the relevant provisions of the Final Act so that religious faiths, institutions, organizations and their representatives can, in the field of their activity, develop contacts and meetings among themselves and exchange information.'' Human Contacts The whole issue of human contacts has been highlighted in Madrid by the sadly unsatisfactory record of Soviet performance. Their record on reunification of families is abysmal. We responded to these violations of the act by continuing to highlight the issue throughout the meetings. In addition, some forward movement beyond the Helsinki Final Act was achieved in the Madrid Concluding Document. The participating states have pledged: - To ''favorably deal with'' and ''decide upon'' applications for family meetings, reunification and marriage. The Final Act provided only that they would ''consider'' or ''deal with applications in a positive and humanitarian spirit.'' - That marriage and family reunification applications will be decided ''within six months,'' the first reference to a definite time period. - That making or renewing applications for family reunification will not modify rights to ''employment, housing, residence status, family support, access to social, economic or educational benefits.'' - To reduce fees charged in connection with emigration ''to bring them to a moderate level in relation to the average monthly income,'' a new standard by which to judge fee levels. - To inform applicants as ''expeditiously as possible of the decision'' on their cases and inform them of ''their right to renew applications after reasonably short intervals.'' The Madrid Concluding Document also adds an important new element to the provisions of the Helsinki Final Act by specifying that visitors to diplimatic and other official missions and consular posts will be assured of access. There was one additional step taken after months of debate and stalemate. The Government of Switzerland invited the participating states to an experts' meeting to deal with human contacts during April 1986. This was finally accepted by the Soviet Union. A late date was selected so that we will have time to examine how the new provisions in the Madrid agreement will have been complied with. Human Rights Experts' Meeting The desirability of convening a Human Rights Experts' Meeting was first expressed by the West in Madrid in February 1981. We looked upon this highly controversial proposal as vital if we are ever to achieve understanding between East and West. We are pleased that the proposed experts' meeting received approval after more than two years of consideration. It is to take place in Ottawa, Canada, in May 1985. Its agenda focuses on the status of human rights ''in their states,'' i.e., the participating states, so as not to broaden its scope to include other areas of the world. Information The Madrid document contains new and helpful provisions designed to strengthen the Helsinki Final Act in this important area. They are: - A provision that participating states will encourage the public sale and distribution of printed matter from other states, including making them ''accessible to reading rooms.'' - A provision that prices of foreign publications should not be excessive in relation to prices in their country of origin. This language is somewhat qualified because Western governments find it difficult to make commitments in this area. - Language confirming that states will ''further extend the possibilities'' for the public to take out foreign subscriptions. - A reference endorsing ''direct contacts among journalists'' and a sentence pledging states to ''increase the possiblities'' and ''improve the conditions'' for foreign journalists to ''establish and maintain personal contacts and communications with their sources.'' Terrorism The Helsinki Final Act does not deal with terrorism. The United States joined the Spanish delegation and others in urging that the Madrid Final Document include a provision on this vital threat to the security of all states. The final document does include such a provision. It includes: - A statement that signatories will ''take effective measures for the prevention and suppression of acts of terrorism, both at the national level and through international cooperation.'' - A commitment to refrain from direct or indirect assistance, financing, encouraging or tolerating terrorist or subversive activities directed at the violent overthrow of the government of other participating states. - A pledge that states will ''do their utmost'' to assure necessary security to all diplomatic, consular and official representatives of other states. Security The NATO group of states in February 1981 presented a French proposal calling for the establishment of a conference to take place after the Madrid meeting to deal with military confidence-building measures. The problem of surprise military attack is one uppermost in the minds of Europeans. After long and intensive debate a mandate for the conference fully acceptable to us was adopted. It meets our four essential criteria: - The conference will be an integral part of the C.S.C.E. process. - The conference will not interfere with ongoing arms negotiations, such as M.B.F.R. - The first stage of the conference will deal exclusively with confidence-building measures. - Confidence and security building measures agreed to at the conference are to be militarily significant, politically binding, verifiable and applicable to the whole of Europe. The extension of the area to the Urals is quite significant because the limited confidence-building measures adopted in 1975 exempted the Soviet Union from their coverage, except for the first 250 kilometers within its borders. Follow-Up Meetings Here is a list of the eight future meetings provided for in the Madrid document: 1. The first stage of a C.D.E. commencing Jan. 17, 1984, in Stockholm, to be preceded by a three-week preparatory meeting to take place beginning on Oct. 25, 1983, in Helsinki. 2. A six-week Experts' Meeting on the Peaceful Settlement of Disputes, in Athens, beginning March 21, 1984.  3. A seminar on Mediterranean cooperation, in Venice, Oct. 16-26, 1984.  4. An Experts' Meeting on Human Rights in Ottawa, lasting six weeks and commencing May 7, 1985.  5. A commemorative meeting in Helsinki, in 1985, marking the 10th anniversary of the signing of the Final Act. 6. A Cultural Forum, in Budapest, sometime in 1985.  7. An Experts' Meeting on Human Contacts, in Bern, Switzerland, lasting six weeks and commencing April 16, 1986.  8. The third follow-up meeting of the C.S.C.E., in Vienna, starting Nov. 4, 1986."
