"The modern world's unfreedom brings to mind certain situations from crime films: the telephone rings, the criminal orders the kidnapped victim to pick up the receiver and speak with the caller in a normal, friendly tone of voice. Or, unexpectedly, someone enters a house taken over by criminals. The person who lives there, aware of the hidden bandits' pistols trained on him, receives his guest as if nothing at all were wrong, fixes him a drink, tries to act normal, and as quickly as possible drives away the one person who might have been able to help him. Or, bandits fleeing from a bank push a terrified woman teller out in front of them, using her body as a shield as they run to their car. The woman begs the guardians of justice not to shoot and to let the bandits make a safe getaway. That's how it is with entire nations in today's world. Where are the beautiful times of old-fashioned slavery? Where is the battle of the invader with the language of the oppressed, with their emblems of state; where are the open, ceremonial persecutions of patriots; where are the solemn executions of heroes? That slavery, in retrospect, was open, theatrical, celebrational. And everyone knew who was coercing the weak and who would answer to the court of history for that coercion. Today slavery has become invisible. On the surface some poor nation behaves naturally, listens with reverence to its own anthem, elects a parliament, dispatches emissaries, sits on the Security Council; in a word, acts like any independent, sovereign state. And not one sees the revolver at its back, a cocked revolver belonging to its neighbor or to some other country. A nation of this sort utters businesslike, thoughtful, even profound speeches with a poker face and no one could guess that, with all its strength, from the marrow out, it wants to roar like a beast whose throat is being cut, screech like a rabbit being skinned, howl to God for help against inevitable doom. Previously, a slave was entitled to cry out; today the slave has been assured the right of silence, muteness. Crying out brought relief, as it does for a newborn baby. Silence and muteness cause degeneration, they suffocate, kill. Previously, when a captive nation regained its freedom, it was not hindered in joining the great family of free nations. Today, if by chance it is set free, it will no longer be fit for life and will perish from the poisons accumulated during the dark night of captivity. In Poland the nobility of educated monarchs, the energy of intelligent ministers, the goodwill of the citizenry, the homage to mankind's lofty ideas, in Poland all these positive, exemplary, copybook values were, quite unexpectedly, devalued. Out of the blue, they were prostituted and dragged the venerable corpse of the republic straight to the bottom like a millstone. We're well aware of what happened and why. Our historiographers have taken precise soundings of the vertebral column of Polish history. They have brought to light all manner of defects, faults, and degeneration. We know that our ''golden freedom'' was our undoing. That fierce, mad adherence to the freedoms of the individual citizen, the autonomy and independence of the person. All our troubles stem from that unbridled freedom... Like a bad pupil, like a dunce in the corner, like street hooligans, we are used as an example by the wise and bearded historiographers of our exemplary neighbors, who, instead of submerging themselves in freedom, making a god and a religion of it, build strong, despotic states based on tyranny, the staunch superiority of the state over the confused individual, a cult of crushing individuals in the name of the genocidal goals of mighty Molochs. Our history envies our beheaded neighbors with their lawless states, the ultimate captivity of the thinking beings called by biologists, our fellow historians, Homo sapiens. But to hell with that unfulfilled career of despots and tyrants. To hell with that unrealized role of the gendarme in Europe. To hell with that abortive summoning of defenseless individuals and entire helpless nations to the hangman. What is it that we should be ashamed of? A fondness for freedom?  Even though it was a foolish, mad, total, anarchistic, provincial freedom, the freedom which leads to ruin. I know, I know. I know full well those ominous examples of our golden freedom which gave rise to our nation's entire chain of misfortunes and tragedies, I see the immensity of the evil born out of old-time, Sarmatian, noble, selfish, nihilistic, unthinking, lone-wolf, egotistical Polish freedom. But had we been a disciplined, ordered, antlike society of the Anglo-Saxon variety, would we have been spared by acquisitive despots, would our aggressive, totalitarian neighbors not have quartered our corpse? For nobility will always succumb to villainy, virtue fall at the feet of crime, freedom perish at the hands of the unfree. Though one may equally say that righteousness will conquer sin, good be victorious over evil, freedom triumph over slavery. But let us remember that the good is free like a cloud in the sky and that evil is swift as lightning. Translation copyright c 1981 Farrar, Straus, Giroux Inc. --------------------------------------------------------------------- Tadeusz Konwicki, a novelist, lives in Poland. These are excerpts from the forthcoming novel ''The Polish Complex,'' translated by Richard Lourie."
