"With only two days to go before the opening of a conference here to review compliance with the Helsinki accords on human rights, the United States and its allies remained at loggerheads today with the Soviet Union and several Eastern European countries over an agenda. Diplomats from some of the 35 nations represented here were fearful that the opening session on Tuesday might begin without ground rules. An attempt by a Swiss delegate, Peter Trondle, to mediate the dispute this evening produced no concrete results. Leonid F. Ilyichev, a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, was expected to arrive tonight from Moscow, possibly bearing new instructions that would give the Russian delegation greater flexibility. Helsinki's Lofty Promises Since the preparatory sessions opened on Sept. 9, Yuri V. Dubinin, the Soviet representative, has been arguing for a sharp curtailment in the time to be given to discussing such embarrassing issues for the Soviet Union as its intervention in Afghanistan and alleged human rights violations in Eastern Europe. The Madrid conference, which in principle should run for several months, is the second meeting by the Helsinki signatories to examine compliance with the the 1975 accords, which called for respect of human rights within the nations signing the agreement and guaranteed the security of those countries from outside intervention. and to put forward new proposals to advance cooperation in Europe. At the last review session, held in Belgrade three years ago, the Soviet Union was severely attacked for alleged human rights infringements. Moscow has clearly decided that meeting in Madrid should not turn into a similar forum. A document put forward by East Germany, Hungary and Czechoslovakia would effectively limit to two weeks the amount of time devoted to compliance review. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization, softening its stand somewhat, has said that this phase could perhaps be completed in four weeks. The details of a compromise could be put together very quickly and some veteran diplomats were predicting an 11th-hour deal, perhaps tomorrow night or even Tuesday morning. Griffin B. Bell, the former United States Attorney General and head of the American delegation, was expected to arrive tonight, accompanied by about 50 members of the United States group, many of them Carter Administration loyalists. The victory of Ronald Reagan in this week's Presidential election appears to make it likely that Mr. Bell will play a largely ceremonial role at the opening sessions and then return to the United States. For the last two months, the American delegation in Madrid has been headed by Max M. Kampelman, a Democratic political figure who is close to Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington. No Problem of Continuity Mr. Kampelman is reported to have been in touch with the Reagan camp, and, for the moment, there does not appear to be a problem of continuity between the policies of President Carter and those of Mr.  Reagan, who will take office on Jan. 20. The position of the 15 NATO nations and Spain appears to be that if no agenda is agreed on by Tuesday the sessions should be guided by the Belgrade procedures. The Soviet Union argues that preparatory talks should continue, beyond Tuesday if necessary, until a mutually acceptable working document is drafted. A failure to reach agreement by Tuesday, many neutral diplomats fear, would produce chaos and sharp public recriminations that might mark the end of what is called ''the Helsinki process.''"
