"WHEN Carmen Popescu stepped into the bright August sunlight beyond her prison last summer in Bucharest, Rumania, guards handed her a food package from Dobbs Ferry. The release of Mrs. Popescu, who had been jailed in 1981 for ''propaganda against the socialist state,'' had been the goal of Amnesty International Adoption Group No. 253, Hastings-Dobbs Ferry Chapter. The Amnesty International organization and its local chapters never claim credit for the release of a prisoner, although vigorous efforts may have been made in the process. The 15 teachers, homemakers and business executives in Adoption Group 253 wrote more than 100 letters to Rumanian officials, Congressional Representatives, State Department officials and to the press on Carmen Popescu's behalf. They sent food parcels at their own expense. Last spring, they held a vigil near the Rumanian Mission to the United Nations in New York City and accounts of the vigil were broadcast by Radio Free Europe. After Mrs. Popescu was released, her case coordinator in Hastings, Rebecca Cooney, said: ''Before I joined Amnesty International, I never felt that I, as an individual, could make such a difference.'' Miss Cooney, a Hastings resident who is director of public education for Inform, a nonprofit environmental-research organization, added: ''We don't know if our efforts caused Carmen's release, but it seems too coincidental.'' Miss Cooney joined Amnesty International after seeing the film ''Missing,'' a 1982 political thriller based on an actual event: the disappearance of a young American writer during a South American coup. She first joined the ''Urgent Action Network'' of Amnesty International, which issues immediate appeals to prevent torture or rescue prisoners who need medical attention or who have received a death sentence. Later, she joined the newly formed adoption group meeting in Hastings. There are about 75 active members of Amnesty International in the county. On member, Sarita Copeland, explained her decision to join by saying: ''I want to put the energy we have as Americans to speak out and to talk and to move things instead of saying 'I'll give $10.' Through Amnesty International, you can do something for another who doesn't have the political freedom they should - who are repressed for doing not much more than we have done.'' There are four ''adoption groups,'' as the basic Amnesty action unit is called, in the county. Each meets monthly to plan strategies for their ''prisoners of conscience,'' who include a Uruguayan construction worker, a Soviet poet and a Turkish trade unionist. As defined by Amnesty International, ''prisoners of conscience'' are ''men and women detained anywhere for their beliefs, color, ethnic origin, sex, religion or language, who have neither used nor advocated violence.'' According to Amnesty sponsors, the definition demands impartiality and places the organization above politics. ''Human-rights abuses take place anywhere in the political spectrum,'' Miss Cooney said. Mrs. Copeland added: ''It's not important that the people who complained about Carmen Popescu's imprisonment agreed with her politically. Most people in jail are dissidents. The criteria is the same in every country.'' Amnesty International began in England 22 years ago and has grown to more than 750,000 members in 150 countries. Last year the international human rights organization gave its chapters nearly 5,000 cases of human rights violations to look into, out of many more reports received. Amnesty International received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1977. The organization's headquarters in England is also the research center, which documents records of human rights violations. Cases are then assigned to adoption groups. Group organizers say the assignments are made with care, to insure, in the words of the Amnesty International Handbook, that ''sufficient overall political contrast is maintained to preclude any suspicion that the individual Amnesty group is politically biased.'' Adoption groups usually work on two or three cases simultaneously, helping prisoners of conscience representing all elements of the political spectrum. As a further safeguard against political bias, adoption groups are not assigned ''prisoners of conscience'' from their own countries. Mrs. Popescu's was the first case coordinated by the Hastings chapter. With three possible choices offered to the group by the international secretariat, Mrs. Popescu was picked, Mrs. Copeland said, ''because her case seemed the most helpless, and because she seemed most like us.'' Mrs. Popescu, a 41-year-old single parent and office worker, had been imprisoned, according to Miss Cooney, ''after she tried to sign a human rights appeal.'' Before Mrs. Popescu's release, the group adopted a second ''prisoner of conscience,'' Im Tong-gyu, a South Korean sentenced to two terms of life imprisonment for belonging to two banned political parties. Amnesty International said it believes that the real reason for Mr. Im's arrest was his criticism of the Government's farm policies. Mr. Im, formerly head of the general affairs division at Korea University's Labor Problem Research Institute, had also tried to help farmers form independent cooperatives. The Hastings Amnesty group has written to, among others, President Reagan, Senator Edward M. Kennedy and Cesar Chavez, head of the United Farm Workers of America, seeking their help in obtaining Mr. Im's release. In Tarrytown, Adoption Group 125 meets each month at the Hackley School to consider how to help Rikhard Spalin, a member of the True and Free Seventh Day Adventist Church in the Soviet Union. Mr. Spalin, the group says, is serving a seven-year sentence for publishing a religious journal. An Albert Einstein College of Medicine research biologist, Leonard Lothstein, chairman of the Tarrytown group, is organizing support for Mr. Spalin among church members in the county. A second political prisoner supported by the group is Amalia Solarizch, a Uruguayan woman whose husband, a former ''prisoner of conscience,'' fled the country for Sweden. When Mrs. Solarizch, preparing to join her husband, sought asylum in the Swedish Embassy in Uruguay, she ''disappeared,'' according to Amnesty members. The Tarrytown group is trying to locate Mrs. Solarizch and has enlisted the aid of Representative Benjamin Gilman. Advising the Tarrytown group is Ludmilla Alexeeva Williams, a faculty member at the Hackley School and a founding member of the Helsinki Watch Group, organized by the Soviet scientist Andrei Sakharov to monitor his country's compliance with the 1975 Helsinki Accords on European security and cooperation.  Mr. Lothstein said that members of the Watch Group who had been residents of the Soviet Union had all been imprisoned there or expelled from the country. At 10:30 one morning last week, students in the humanities department of the State University of New York at Purchase conducted a 45-minute reading of parts of the trial of Gintautus Iesmantas, a 53-year-old Soviet poet found guilty of writing poetry advocating freedom for Lithuania. Shortly after his arrest in 1980, Mr. Iesmantas was adopted by Amnesty International Group 42 in White Plains. The group decided that if their prisoner had been imprisoned for writing 36 pieces of poetry, ''we'd like to see it,'' said Joan Sandifor, coordinator of the group. It ''arranged'' for samples of the poetry to be smuggled out of the Soviet Union, but instead received 165 typed pages of the transcript of Mr. Iesmantas's trial. Mrs. Sandifor, an industrial relations specialist who is not currently employed, described herself as one who ''really truly believes human rights cannot be left to governments.'' She estimated that she spent about 15 hours a week on Amnesty International business. ''People can make a difference,'' she said. ''I'm very interested in travel plans. When Andropov's son went to Madrid, we had letters waiting for him at the embassy.'' Amnesty Group No. 154 reaches from its base in Harrison to an imprisoned law student, Leon Yelome, in West Africa and to a Turkish trade unionist, Ali Sahin, one of 52 union leaders whose lengthy trial captured international attention. Although the adoption group's chairman, Joan Selig, said she had no personal knowledge of Mr. Sahin's condition, ''There have been continuing allegations of mistreatment and torture of these men.'' A year ago Representative Richard L. Ottinger read into the Congressional Record a description of the plight of Mr. Sahin and a commendation of the efforts of Amnesty Group No. 154. The group has taken on a third ''prisoner of conscience,'' a Uruguayan construction worker who, Mrs. Selig said, ''was walking along the street one day and just disappeared.'' A former prisoner wrote to her, Mrs. Selig said, that ''he heard the man cry out for three days; then it stopped.'' The group carries on correspondence with other prisoners, but Mrs. Selig declined to give details, so as not to endanger them. The letters, she said, ''all say the same thing - these people are putting their lives on the line but they are never bitter.'' The work for Amnesty International prisoners is often discouraging, she said, but ''we owe them a debt.'' ''They defend freedom at such a cost,'' she continued. ''All we do is write letters from our safe little homes.'' Yesterday , the four Westchester adoption groups of Amnesty International observed the celebration of Human Rights Day. The day also marked the culmination of an international petition drive - originally proposed by Mr. Sakharov - seeking a universal amnesty for all ''prisoners of conscience.'' Sponsors expected that they would have two million signatures to present to the United Nations and to embassies of governments holding ''prisoners of conscience.'' In the county, a number of public signing ceremonies were held last week."
