"To the Editor:  Fran,cois de Rose calls it a ''Rights Charade in Madrid'' (Op-Ed Aug. 17) because his analysis of the nearly three-year East-West confrontation is based only on the visible aspects of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. France's former NATO ambassador obviously uses legalistic, perhaps even military, criteria to conclude that the West played the fool by joining the East in signing new human rights pledges. He ignores the West's psychological and diplomatic gains the past three years. No one expects the Soviet Union to alter its repressive system quickly, but the Madrid meetings make that system more difficult and more costly to sustain. For three years, Western radios repeatedly broadcast into the Soviet Union and its satellites the no-holds- barred attacks on the Communist system at every level. Jamming blocked some of these broadcasts, but that only further intrigues East-bloc citizens. At Madrid, every aspect of Soviet repression was linked to human- rights abuses: the invasion of Afghanistan, Moscow-directed attacks on the people of Poland by their own military, and highly detailed violations in the U.S.S.R. and in other bloc countries.  The U.S. delegate, Max M. Kampelman, ''named names'' repeatedly. He used every occasion - a date marking the maltreatment of a human-rights activist, a national or international occasion, or reports from human-rights activists themselves - to describe in moving, eloquent terms the repressive nature of Soviet society today.  These steadily repeated charges, over three years, did not fall on deaf ears. The substantial Soviet and East- bloc bureaucracies, up and down the lines to their capitals, had to respond to what they knew to be the realities described by Ambassador Kampelman. Often, the East's responses were pitiful.  The negotiations produced more than these public-broadcast and in- channel challenges. The conference agreed to hold a new series of meetings, at which the human rights and other violations of the East bloc will be further elaborated. This Helsinki process systematizes the West's challenge to the East bloc on human- rights grounds. Human-rights activists in the East urge the West to increase, not reduce, the revelations of Soviet-bloc violations of human rights. Such revelations can be systematically sustained because the pledges they violate are codified and signed by the East bloc. The Madrid meetings increased the number and quality of those pledges, as Ambassador de Rose himself mentioned. But he misses the main point of these Helsinki reviews: the daily opportunity to parade the violator before world opinion, even if he cannot be taken into a court of law. No one who attended the Madrid review doubts that the Soviet Union wishes it had never signed the human-rights section of the Helsinki accords. The West is by no means foolish to use the Helsinki process to hold the East bloc - as often as possible - to an ever higher standard of human rights. LEONARD R. SUSSMAN Executive Director, Freedom House New York, Aug. 17, 1983"
