"The Soviet Union said today that it was prepared to reach a compromise to bring the long-deadlocked Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe to a ''successful and immediate conclusion.'' Both Eastern and Western diplomats from among the 35 nations attending the conference greeted the move with relief and a kind of suppressed optimism. They saw it as something that could finally break a logjam, making nearly three years of hard bargaining worthwhile and perhaps even breathing a bit of life back into East-West detente. The diplomats have begun talking again about a ''spirit of Madrid,'' a somewhat nebulous concept that seems to mean that if both sides sit down long enough and try hard enough they can eventually come to some kind of understanding. Accord Would Be First in Years If, as now seems likely, the conference produces a final document laying down further pledges to respect human rights and strive for disarmament, it would be the first significant agreement between Moscow and Washington since the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan in December 1979. It would also be the first significant step toward closer cooperation between the Reagan Administration and the new Soviet leadership headed by Yuri V. Andropov, coming at a time of increased tensions over threatened arms buildups and the scheduled deployment of United States medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe. Delegates did not rule out the prospect of a major show of rare East-West accord that could take place at a signing ceremony in Madrid in the next few weeks. They speculated that both Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko and Secretary of State George P. Shultz would find reasons to attend. The final agreement that seems likely to emerge, the product of literally hundreds of hours of bargaining and word splitting, is a balanced document with pluses and minuses for both sides. Human Rights Issues Muted It does not contain many of the strong proposals to expand human rights that were sought by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries in such areas as explicit right to form free trade unions, prohibition against jamming of broadcasts and the setting up of citizens' groups to monitor human rights. But it does, in the view of Western delegates, advance ''the Helsinki process'' through a series of pledges to combat terrorism, guarantee religious freedom, allow nationals access to foreign missions and permit journalists ''to establish and maintain personal contacts and communication with their sources.'' The document also contains what had been a major Soviet objective, the convening of a special conference among the same 35 nations to consider ''confidence-building measures'' to guard against surprise attack in Europe and also, at a later stage, to tackle disarmament.  In the current version of the document, the conference would begin in Stockholm next January. A Review of 1975 Helsinki Pact The Madrid conference, which opened in September 1980, was to review and expand upon the 1975 Final Act of the Helsinki conference, which set down a broad code of conduct for closer cooperation and better relations in Europe. A review meeting in Belgrade in 1977 ended in failure. The specter of another failure hung over this session almost from the start, since it turned into a forum for charges and countercharges over Afghanistan and then over the declaration of martial law in Poland in December 1981. But with intermittent recesses, it continued, largely, it seemed, because neither side wanted the onus of breaking off the talks. Some of the original negotiators, who came expecting to stay two or three months, now speak fluent Spanish. Two weeks ago the two sides were at an impasse, although they had narrowed their differences considerably. The Soviet bloc agreed to accept a package of compromise proposals advanced by a group of eight neutral nations in March, but refused to consider four modifications being sought by the West to strengthen human rights provisions. Spain Proposes Compromise At this point, the Spanish Government intervened. Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez invited the delegates to adopt a Spanish compromise with two main features. One would drop a veiled reference to radio jamming, which the Soviet Union did not want in the document. The other was an agreement to hold a special meeting to discuss ''human contacts,'' including the sensitive issue of reunification of families split between Eastern and Western countries. This meeting was being sought in particular by the United States. The West accepted the Spanish proposals, but the Soviet bloc, until today, had insisted it could make no further concessions. The shift in the Soviet position came after its delegation visited Moscow for consultations and then engaged in three days of backroom bargaining here. The statement today before the closed session by the chief Soviet delegate, Anatoly G. Kovalev, a Deputy Foreign Minister, stopped short of accepting the Spanish proposals outright. But he made clear his country's willingness to make an agreement based upon them. Moscow Says It 'Is Ready to Act' ''The Soviet delegation is ready to act within the framework of the initiative of the Spanish Government to act in such a manner that mutually acceptable solutions might be found through joint efforts,'' he said. Citing a continued commitment to detente, he held out hope for a ''successful and immediate conclusion'' of the conference. The chief United States delegate, Max Kampelman, welcomed the shift in the Soviet position. ''I think we're closer to an agreement than we've ever been,'' he said to reporters, although he warned that there were still a few ''issues of consequence'' to be hammered out. One is apparently whether the agreement for a ''human contacts'' meeting, which would take place in Bern in April 1986 under the Spanish proposal, is contained in the text of the final document or in a separate annex. This would give it less status, in the Western view."
