"The signing by Argentina of a long-term agreement to supply the Soviet Union with feed grain, blunting the effects of the American boycott, illustrates how far the United States is from influencing the military regime here. The grain agreement, signed last Thursday, provides 22.5 million tons of corn, sorghum and soybeans over the next five years. And it was completed despite Washington's efforts to line up Argentina behind the boycott imposed early this year after the Soviet military intevention in Afghanistan. President Carter sent Lieut. Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, commandant of the United States Military Academy, to explain the importance attached to international opposition to the Soviet action. During the talks, the junta leaders asked when the United States would stop denouncing human rights violations in Argentina and restore military equipment sales, cut off by Congress over that issue. Attractive Business Opportunity On purely commercial grounds, the opportunity for Argentina to increase sales to the Soviet Union at premium prices was highly attractive. But without any inducement or compensation from the United States to refrain from increasing the grain shipments, it was irresistible. ''We keep asking Argentina to do things for us, but we don't offer anything in return,'' said Raul H. Castro, the United States Ambassador, who is completing a three-year tour. A former Arizona Governor and a leading political figure in Hispanic-American districts, he is returning to campaign for Mr. Carter. The failure of the United States to deflect Argentina from taking advantage of the grain embargo is matched by the ineffectiveness of American efforts to dissuade Argentina from following an independent road to nuclear development, which points toward the reprocessing of spent power-station fuel with separation of plutonium, a weaponsgrade material. The nuclear program, which began in the 1960's with an experimental scientific reactor burning enriched uranium supplied by the United States, has expanded into an electric-power system based on heavy water and domestic uranium. With one power reactor in operation, another under construction and a third under contract, Argentina succesfully negotiated with a West German-Swiss group for construction of a heavy-water plant after failing to obtain long-term supplies from the United States. The Carter Administration opposed the European deal, but it has gone forward anyway. Now, Argentina has rejected the latest United States conditions for full-scope safeguards over nuclear facilities as a condition for replenishment of the enriched uranium for the first reactor. An Argentine nuclear energy mission has visited the Soviet Union to discuss the supply of enriched uranium, according to commission sources. France has also been sounded out. The Carter Administration showed its concern over rights violations in Argentina in 1977, at the height of repression of urban guerrilla groups, by ordering the Export-Import Bank to refrain from offering financing for a bid by Allis-Chalmers on an Argentine turbine contract. This was reversed after President Jorge Rafael Videla agreed to the visit by the Inter-American Human Rights Commission last September. A report by the commission documents violations, but recognizes significant improvement in the situation since early last year."
