"Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar is carrying out talks with Polish authorities for the release from prison of leading members of the banned Solidarity movement and other human rights activists, according to officials here. They spoke of his efforts after the United States and rights activists had denounced a United Nations Secretariat report on Poland as uncritical of continuing repression. On Friday, Mr. Perez de Cuellar seemed to hint at his contacts with the Polish Government when he reacted to the criticism. A statement issued on his behalf said: ''Concrete results in advancing the cause of human rights should be the criterion for judging his performance and not whether his statements or reports serve the political interests of one side or another.'' 18 Detainees Reported Involved His talks with the Poles were reported by officials here to involve 11 dissidents, including Jacek Kuron and Adam Michnik, and seven Solidarity detainees. The officials did not say how advanced the talks were or whether they were aimed at having the detainees leave Poland. Sources close to Solidarity have said in the past that the union activists were opposed to emigration. Meanwhile, the draft of a United Nations report that was passed over by the Secretariat lists abuses purportedly committed by the Government that were not incorporated into the official report delivered to the recent session of the Commission on Human Rights in Geneva. It was the official report, prepared by a special representative of Mr. Perez de Cuellar, that provoked criticism. At a press conference in Geneva last week, the American representative to the Human Rights Commission, Richard Schifter, called the report by the Secretary General's office ''this session's great disappointment.'' Mr. Schifter said the report, which was regarded as mild compared to rights reports on other countries, was an important factor in persuading commission members to defer further investigation of human rights in Poland. U.S. Delegate Is Critical In a telephone interview, Mr. Schifter criticized Mr. Perez de Cuellar's statement regarding his efforts to obtain the release of prisoners. ''It is as if the mandate to issue a report did not exist, but that he only had to negotiate the release of political prisoners,'' Mr. Schifter said. Mr. Perez de Cuellar in an interview Monday denied that the report had been toned down for the sake of his effort to obtain the release of detainees. ''I try not to make politics out of human rights,'' he said. Referring to the critics, he added: ''They are unable to accept that a report might depart from their preconceived position.'' During a visit to Poland in January, he announced the release from prison of a United Nations employee, Alicia Wesolowska, who had been detained for four years.  Release Unrelated to Report Officials here said the release of Miss Wesolowska was unrelated to the content of the report on Poland. Mr. Perez de Cuellar, they said, had been assured that she would be freed before he undertood his visit to Poland. The report, prepared by Patricio Ruedas, an Under Secretary General, lists 15 people said to have died because of mistreatment or from ''unexplained circumstances.'' The stress of the report, however, is on the amnesty that was declared last year and applied to nearly 5,000 political prisoners. ''Poland is in the process of change,'' the report said, adding that the clemency has ''produced conditions favorable to a reconciliation between different sectors of Polish society.'' The material not used by the Secretary General's office, which was made available by people dissatisfied with United Nations activities on Poland, details dozens of cases of new arrests, beatings and mistreatment. It also lists a number of people whose health conditions are said to have ''seriously deteriorated'' in jail."
