"The fourth Moscow International Book Fair opened here Tuesday with limited American participation but with works of Mao Zedong back on public display in the Soviet Union after an absence of two decades. A steady waning of American participants at the biennial fairs has followed the course of Soviet-American relations, with American frustration over Soviet censorship and human- rights violations, coupled with disappointment over the amount of hard currency the Russians are willing to expend on books, steadily eroding the early promises of detente. At the last Moscow fair, scientific and technical publishers like Plenum and Academic Press accounted for the bulk of American exhibitors, and only two major general publishers, Times Mirror and Harper & Row, mounted sizable separate exhibitions. The arguments put forward by those who came and by those who stayed away echoed the broader dispute being waged in American governmental, scientific and business circles over how to deal with the Soviet Union - the one side arguing that Americans could not deal normally with a state that suppressed its independent writers and thinkers and the other countering that maintaining direct ties with Russians through cultural exchanges like the book fair was critical for disseminating American ideas of freeedom and pluralism. Rights Violations Cited Martin P. Levin, president of book publishing for The Times Mirror group - which included the Harry N. Abrams art-book division, Mosby- Year Book and The New American Library - said that some publishers had objected to attending the current fair, which ends Monday, because of human rights violations by the Soviet Union. ''To me though this the best single way to make contact with the Russians,'' Mr. Levin said. ''Not a single one of our books was seized. They agreed to our conditions to let American Jews and Israel mount exhibits. It seems to me that despite what is happening at major levels of government, at the people level we're still making contact, providing a bridge over which we can walk someday. This is the best propaganda we can offer - a demonstration of freedom of expression and a level of consumer spending greater than anywhere else in the world.'' The United States Government, however, has apparently disagreed. For the last two fairs, it has declined to repeat the enormously popular exhibition of American book publishing it mounted at the 1979 fair and has offered no assistance to participating American exhibitors. The British Government, by contrast, offered any British participant two round-trip London-Moscow air tickets and organized two embassy receptions around the fair. Concern Over Flights The downing of the Korean jetliner over the north Pacific hovered mutely over the fair, with many Western exhibitors expressing anxiety about their return home once the boycott by Western airlines of flights to Moscow begins. Some exhibitors said that Soviet visitors had quietly asked them for information about the affair, and what it might mean to relations with the Soviet Union. The Harry N. Abrams stand of art books seemed a favorite with Russian visitors to the fair, and to curtail the thefts that have marked past fairs the Soviet organizers planted platoons of plainclothes security men at the more popular exhibits. The guards seemed particularly alert around the stands that have traditionally held the greatest interest for some Russians. These were the exhibition of the Protestant Church-Owned Publishers Association, and those of the Association of Jewish Publishers and of Israel. The American Jewish presentation, organized by Sol Scharfstein of the Ktav Publishing House in New York, distributed prized English-Russian catalogues to all comers with pages of Jewish recipes, explanations of Jewish holidays and a fold-out Hebrew Russian alphabet. Mr. Scharfstein made no secret that his reason for coming to Moscow had nothing in common with Mr. Levin's. ''The American publishers' boycott of the fair is our lifeblood. If they didn't boycott, the Russians wouldn't need us here,'' he said. He explained that he believed that Soviet organizers had included the Jewish and Protestant publishers to swell the American contingent at the fair. Although Mr. Scharfstein referred to a boycott, leading American publishers in New York who are not participating in the fair stressed that there was no organized boycott. One of the reasons often cited for not attending is a shortage of business with other than scientific and technical books. A notable first at the fair was the appearance of the Peoples Republic of China as an exhibitor, a reflection of the new Moscow-Peking contacts begun last year. By coincidence, Mikhail S. Kapitsa, the Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister responsible for Chinese affairs, left today for meetings with Chinese officials."
