"To the Editor:  Flora Lewis's ''Yugoslavia's Dilemma'' (Nov. 23) mischaracterizes the status of freedoms in that country. Her assertion of an ''extraordinary open debate'' in Yugoslavia, even relative to Communist countries, rings hollow, given a growing pattern of repression. The current trial of Belgrade dissidents is not simply an official ''spasm of indecision,'' as she calls it. It is rather the latest development in a hardening policy regarding expression. Sixty-five percent of some 700 Yugoslav political prisoners are imprisoned for so-called verbal crimes - e.g., ''hostile propaganda,'' ''spreading false news,'' ''damaging the country's reputation'' - allowing irritated officials to jail individuals merely for what they say. Numerous recent examples include the 1983 jailing of Milan Soklic for privately criticizing restrictions on expression and the 1984 reimprisonment of Franjo Tudjman after describing the Croatian situation to a representative of the International League for Human Rights. They show the ease with which authorities can level such charges. Virtually any criticism of the Government can be interpreted as an offense under this vague formulation. Expression is also stifled in other ways. Recent years have witnessed repeated publication bannings, firings of editors, publishing-house closings and book burnings - all on the ground that they clashed with party determinations. Simultaneously, a barrage of official threats and criticism is directed against the press. Self-censorship, its byproduct, further checks expression.  The trial under way in Belgrade has special significance. It marks the tightening of controls over a city previously known as one of Yugoslavia's most liberal. Discussion groups - like that attended by the dissidents and for which they were indicted - had been tolerated for years in the capital. Concern that the trial signifies the culmination of a new hard line is such that 19 Yugoslavs took the extreme step of founding a committee to protect freedom of speech last week. The trial has also provoked a loud outcry of protest from West European opinion makers. Whether debate can be described as ''open,'' relative to Yugoslavia's past or to other countries, merits re- examination. NINA H. SHEA KATHARINA ZACH New York, Nov. 27, 1984 The writers are, respectively, program director and research associate of the International League for Human Rights."
