"The Soviet Government has added a new law to its books that dissidents fear will be used to stretch the labor-camp terms of political prisoners. The law, which went into effect in the Russian republic of the Soviet Union on Oct. 1, provides terms of up to five years for prisoners who disobey or oppose labor-camp administrators. The measure is applicable to all prisoners, but dissidents believe that it will be applied primarily to human rights activists who refuse to renounce their activities or causes while in camps. Both dissidents and Western diplomats who monitor human rights in the Soviet Union saw the measure as a new weapon in the tough crackdown on dissidence that began about three years before Yuri V. Andropov became the Soviet leader and has continued unabated under him. 'Malicious Disobedience' The law, Article 188-3 of the criminal code of the Russian republic, states that ''malicious disobedience to lawful demands made by the administration of a corrective labor institution, or any other opposition to the administration in the execution of its functions'' by a prisoner who has been sent to an isolation cell or transferred to prison in the preceding year can bring up to three more years of imprisonment. Prisoners considered ''especially dangerous recidivists'' or those convicted of a ''grave crime'' can be sentenced up to five additional years. Dissidents say the measure codified and simplified a practice that has become increasingly frequent in recent years, when a number of dissidents nearing the end of their terms have found themselves sentenced to new terms, often on charges of slandering the state while in camp. In December 1982, for example, Valery Abramkin was nearing the end of a three-year term for publishing an underground magazine when he was transferred to jail to face new charges of ''orally spreading slander against the Soviet state.'' Others Also Charged Similar charges were brought against Vyacheslav Bakhmin, who had campaigned against the abuse of psychiatry, and a number of other dissidents. The new law, however, apparently relieves authorities of the need to compile a new case against a dissident who is nearing the end of his or her term. Diplomats said it appeared, in effect, to give prison authorities arbitrary power to extend the sentences of dissidents, a practice that was commonplace under Stalin but was largely abandoned in the 1960's and 1970's. The stipulation that the law is applicable to those prisoners who have been punished in the course of their term, either by spending time in isolation cells or in prison, would make most of the prominent dissidents now serving time liable to extended terms. Anatoly B. Shcharansky, for example, was sent from a labor camp where he had served several stretches in a punishment cell, to Chistopol Prison in November 1980, reportedly for refusing to acknowledge his guilt. Similar Route Followed Viktor Nekipelov followed a similar route to Chistopol. Yuri Orlov, Aleksandr Podrabinek, Gleb Yakunin, the Russian Orthodox priest, and numerous other imprisoned dissidents have spent their terms in and out of punishment cells. Each of these dissidents now stands to receive added years in camps for the same alleged infractions that sent them to isolation cells or to prison. Mr. Shcharansky, who was convicted of espionage and is therefore considered to have committed a ''grave'' crime, is liable to receive five more years in prison. The new law appeared in the official gazette of the Russian republic, the largest of the Soviet republics and the one in which most dissidents are serving terms. The measure could be adopted by other republics. Dealing Harshly To dissidents and Western diplomats, the measure represented further evidence that Mr. Andropov will continue dealing harshly with dissidents. He is generally believed to have been responsible for the stringent measures taken against the human rights movement under Leonid I. Brezhnev, when Mr. Andropov was chief of the K.G.B. Mr. Andropov became the Soviet leader when Mr. Brezhnev died in November 1982; if anything, the treatment of dissidents has grown more repressive over the past year, when sentences handed down to dissidents have been severe. Leonid Borodin, a writer who was arrested before Mr. Brezhnev died, was rearraigned on a tougher charge after Mr. Andropov came to power and was sentenced to 10 years in camps and 5 in exile. Iosif Begun, a Jewish activist, recently received the maximum term for anti-Soviet activities, 7 years in camp and 5 in exile. A special campaign has been under way to crush the Solzhenitsyn fund, which dispenses money to families of political prisoners. Lithuanians Sentenced In Lithuania, two Roman Catholic priests, the Rev. Alfonsas Svarinskas and the Rev. Sigitas Tamkiavicius, have been sent to camps for participating in the Catholic Committee for the Defense of Believers' Rights. In Russia, a Russian Orthodox publicist, Zoya Krakhmalnikova, was sentenced to a year in prison and five in exile. This is only a partial listing of the trials and arrests reported over the past year. In the meantime, emigration of Jews and ethnic Germans has almost ceased. One increasingly frequent element that has disturbed many Western experts over the past year has been the publicity given some of the more prominent trials by the Soviet press agency Tass, a practice that to some smacks of the show trials of the Stalin era. Tass has reported on several trials over the past year, invariably beginning with the words ''at an open trial in'' and going on to denounce the activities of the defendant, whether the trial has finished or not. In the case of Father Tamkiavicius last week, Tass denounced the priest as a ''vain and money-loving man'' who systematically ''slandered the Soviet political and social system,'' even before the court had reached the inevitable guilty verdict. Subversion From the West A similar report on Mr. Begun's trial in October in the city of Vladimir was issued by Tass the day before the trial opened. At the same time the press has taken increasingly to saying that dissidents are agents of the C.I.A. or motivated by other ''Western subversion.'' The most common source of such articles has been a book entitled ''C.I.A. Versus U.S.S.R.'' by Nikolai Yakovlev. The third edition of the book, issued last February, traced the entire dissident movement to a C.I.A. conspiracy that began with the ''thaw'' after Stalin's death. The most prominent dissidents were portrayed in the work as corrupt and debauched, and some of the most brutal attacks were focused on Andrei D. Sakharov, the dissident and Nobel Prize-winning physicist who was sent into internal exile in the city of Gorky. Excerpts from the book have been published in Pravda, the Communist Party daily, and a number of other journals and newspapers."
