"Griffin B. Bell, the head of the American delegation to the East-West conference here, severely criticized the Soviet Union tonight for its intervention in Afghanistan and for the curtailment of human rights in Eastern Europe. In his main speech at the conference, Mr. Bell condemned ''the invasion of the independent nation of Afghanistan by armed forces of the Soviet Union, forces which remain in that country even as our meeting convenes.'' At the same time, the Foreign Ministers of Austria, Sweden, Cyprus and Yugoslavia put forward a compromise agenda to break a procedural deadlock that has threatened to sabotage the East-West conference, called to discuss human rights and cooperation in Europe. The compromise appeared to have strong chances of being accepted by both East and West. ''This is our last offer,'' warned Ola Ullsten, the Swedish Foreign Minister, at a news conference. 'Dark Shadow' Over Relations Mr. Bell, a former Attorney General in the Carter Administration, called the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan a violation of the 1975 Helsinki accords, which the Madrid meeting is supposed to review and advance. He said it ''cast a dark shadow over East-West relations which no meeting, no pronouncement, nothing in fact but the total withdrawal of Soviet troops can dispel.'' His sharp criticism of the Soviet Union was echoed, though in sometimes softer tones, by foreign ministers and ranking diplomats from West Germany, Britain, Norway, Switzerland, Sweden and Luxembourg, who spoke on the second day of the troubled Madrid gathering. Mr. Bell praised several Eastern European countries for easing the reunification of families separated by ideological frontiers and for improving church-state relations. He noted that last year 50,000 ethnic Germans had been permitted to immigrate to West Germany. But, turning to ''the lamentable record of the denial of human rights,'' he attacked the jamming of radio broadcasts by the Soviet Union, recent measures taken by East Germany to restrict visits by West Germans, a dropoff in Jewish emigration from the Soviet Union, and the ''continued harassment and periodic imprisonment'' of members of the Charter 77 group in Czechoslovakia that was set up to monitor the infringement of human rights. As the Soviet delegation listened impassively, Mr. Bell ticked off statistics on the imprisonment and banishment of Soviet dissidents such as Yuri F. Orlov, Anatoly B. Shcharansky and the physicist Andrei D. Sakharov. ''When Andrei Sakharov was banished,'' the American envoy said, ''some of our best hopes for a spirit of security and cooperation in Europe were banished with him.'' Only the British delegate, Peter Blaker, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, rivaled the American for harshness of tone on the subject of Afghanistan. ''The Soviet Union,'' Mr. Blaker declared, ''having confirmed at Helsinki at the highest level its intention to conduct its relati ons in the spirit of the principles contained in the Final Act , has comprehensively failed to do so in the case of Afghanistan.  It has done precisely the opposite. The Soviet Union hasbroken every one of the principles.'' Disputing Over Agenda The initiative on the compromise proposal by the four Foreign Ministers, whose nations are either neutral or profess nonalignment, came after today's speeches, when it became apparent that both the Western nations and the Soviet Union and its allies were mired in disputes over the agenda to follow in the coming weeks and months. The compromise working paper would allow five weeks to be devoted to reviewing how countries have fulfilled their Helsinki commitments, a period longer than the Soviet Union wanted, but would restrict raising such contentious questions after Christmas. In the fifth week, before a Christmas break, new proposals to advance detente could be submitted. The main virtue of the compromise paper, which was supported by other neutral and nonaligned European countries, is that elements of it are unsatisfactory to both the United States and the Soviet Union. Both nations have wanted both to avoid losing face by making what would seem to be unilateral concessions, and to give the impression that the other is responsible for the deadlock. The compromise document will be considered tomorrow by a working group. Yesterday, all sides agreed to go ahead with keynote speeches until Satur day, pending a resolution of the a genda issue. Until tonight's initiative by the four foreign mini sters many delegates hadbeen predicting a collapse of the Madrid conf erence altogether."
