"Ernest W. Lefever, a prolific writer and public speaker who is under consideration as the director of human rights policy in the State Department, has in the past seemed to question the value of the policy and of the job he is expected to fill. However, Mr. Lefever said in an interview this week that ''I look upon myself as a great advocate of human rights in a more profound and effective way.'' He opposes the use of punitive sanctions, such as the withdrawal of economic and military aid, from friendly but authoritarian foreign regimes because of human rights abuses. He said he is ''utterly convinced that the most effective way to get reform is quiet diplomacy'' and maintenance of friendly relations. Administration officials predict that the 61-year-old Mr. Lefever will be nominated and confirmed to the post of Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. Considerable Opposition Seen Senator Alan D. Cranston of California, the Democratic whip and a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, said he believed there would be ''considerable Senate opposition'' to Mr. Lefever, adding that he ''seems to have a blind eye to human rights violations by right-wing military dictatorships.'' In some ways, Mr. Lefever's views on human rights seem to fit in with the Reagan Administration's already stated intention of placing less emphasis on human rights than the Carter Administration did. He said in the interview that ''scolding'' a regime - in the case of Argentina, for example - ''didn't bring anybody back to life and was counterproductive.'' On some occasions Mr. Lefever has seemed to suggest that he opposed the present framework of laws under which he would operate as Assistant Secetary of State and to suggest that he doubted the justification for any attempt to influence human rights policies in other nations. Testimony Before Congress In testimony on July 12, 1979, before a subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr. Lefever said that ''in my view the United States should remove from the statute books all clauses that establish a human rights standard or condition that must be met by another sovereign government before our Government transacts normal business with it, unless specifically waived by the President.'' He added, ''It shouldn't be necessary for any friendly state to pass a human rights test before we extend normal trade relations, before we sell arms or before we provide economic or security assistance. ''We have no moral mandate to remake the world in our own image. It is arrogant of us to attempt to reform the domestic behaviors of our allies and even of our adversaries.'' In testimony in 1974 before the inter-American affairs subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr. Lefever was drawn into a colloquy about the use of torture by the ruling military junta in Chile. Abuse Linked to Tradition Mr. Lefever said that a former State Department official had ''pointed out that we must understand the normal level of police abuse which goes on in that part of the world as a residual practice of the Iberian tradition.'' He added that he believed that ''the incidence of torture has dropped off markedly and is approximately normal for that part of the world.'' Mr. Lefever said he believed in ''minimum to zero U.S.  intervention in the internal affairs of other countries,'' adding, ''I am a strong noninterventionist and that includes covert and overt intervention.'' In a 1978 article in the magazine Policy Review, he wrote that policies toward the Soviet Union ''should be determined by our economic and security interests'' and they should not be ''influenced, much less determined, by the extent of human rights violations in the Soviet Union.'' In the interview, Mr. Lefever denied that these and similar statements could accurately be construed to mean that he opposed efforts to force changes in human rights policy on the Soviet Union.  He said any such suggestion rested ''on one sentence, taken out of context.'' Determined Critic of Carter He added that Moscow ''is a very good target for criticism'' and also said that ''with our adversaries I approve of public criticism.'' Mr. Lefever did not say that he favored going beyond criticism to the use of economic sanctions or pressure. Mr. Lefever was a determined and frequent critic of President Carter's human rights policy, charging that Mr. Carter ''trivialized'' the issue. Saying that such ''human rights activists'' failed to make a clear distinction between authoritarianism and totalitarianism, Mr. Lefever added, ''In their preoccupation with the minor abridgment of certain rights in authoritarian states they often overlook the massive threat to the liberty of millions.'' Mr. Lefever said, ''I am known as a moderate, thoughtful and nuanced person, but sometimes I get angry.'' He also said: ''There is a campaign against me. I don't mind attacks based on principle, but I've never been in this kind of unpleasant context before.'' A variety of liberal activists and interest groups say they will ask to testify against Mr. Lefever's nomination, some saying they believe conflict-of-interest questions are involved. This was an allusion to Mr. Lefever's role in a controversy over the marketing of an infant formula for the bottle-feeding of babies in third-world countries. Infant Formula Controversy There is a body of opinion that a marked increase in sales of formula and a decline in breast-feeding has caused an increase in malnutrition and infant deaths in underdeveloped countries, supposedly because of the use of polluted water by impoverished mothers in preparing the formula. The nutritional value and purity of the product when used as directed is not questioned by critics. Mr. Lefever is the president of the Ethics and Policy Center in Washington, which he founded in 1976, and which he has described as a small tax-free research and publication organization aimed at applying ''traditional Judeo-Christian values in the public policy arena.'' The center has received $25,000 from Nestle S.A., the Swiss-based corporation that markets about 50 percent of the infant formula sold in the third world. Mr. Lefever has commissioned a journalist to do a $5,000 study of the controversy and he himself wrote an article in The Wall Street Journal last month defending the industry against what he called ''compassion-created revolutionary rhetoric'' and denouncing a proposed code to limit marketing and promotion of formula as the work of ''self-annointed custodians of rectitude.'' Mr. Lefever called suggestions that a conflict existed ''preposterous'' and said: ''I wish Nestle would give us a lot more -why not?''"
