"The Polish Government denounced as inadequate today the United States' announcement on Wednesday of ''two limited steps'' toward easing economic sanctions imposed after the 1981 declaration of martial law. The protest came in a note handed to the United States charge d'affaires and immediately made public. The Government said the United States move, which was accompanied by a sharp attack on what Washington called the continuing abuse of human rights here, constituted an ''unfriendly and unlawful act'' and an ''inadmissible interference in the affairs of our country.'' The American envoy, John R. Davis Jr., was summoned to the Foreign Ministry to receive the long note, which denounced the two steps as being ''merely of an illusory nature.'' The note said that unless economic and financial restrictions ''and other unfriendly actions'' were ended, ''further deterioration of relations may become inevitable.'' Making Good the Damages Poland, the note said, ''expects the Government of the United States of America to take the necessary steps to make good on the damages suffered by the Polish economy and by the people of Poland.'' Meanwhile, Lech Walesa, founder of the Solidarity union, said he would send his wife, Danuta, to Oslo, Norway, next month to receive his Nobel Peace Prize. Mr. Walesa had expressed concern that if he left Poland, the authorities would not let him back in. He said Mrs. Walesa would be accompanied by their eldest son, Bogdan, 13 years old, and Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a senior Solidarity adviser and editor of the union's newspaper. (A spokesman for the Government, which has condemned the award as an effort to heighten East- West tensions, said, according to The Associated Press, that it had not decided whether Mrs. Walesa would be allowed to leave the country.) Fishing and Debt at Issue The White House announcement said the Reagan Administration would ease restrictions on fishing in United States waters and take steps toward rescheduling Poland's $25 billion debt to the West. But it said the Administration would continue a ban on the Polish airline, restrictions on high-technology sales and a freeze on credits to the Polish economy. The foundering economy depends heavily on imported raw materials and spare parts. Most-favored-nation trading status was withdrawn after Solidarity was outlawed in October 1982. The American moves appeared to have little immediate impact. This year's allocation of fishing quotas has already been closed. Any allocations of fish next year, the White House said, would be directly dependent on ''the Government's action on human rights.'' Poland's Western creditor nations, including the United States, have already begun discussions on rescheduling Poland's debts. Diplomatic sources here privately characterized the American actions as the minimum steps possible in moving toward a change in the strained relations with Poland. But they said it appeared that the American actions might have been designed with the hope of achieving a series of conciliatory moves. There was, for example, speculation that a countergesture from the Polish Government might be the elevation of the American envoy here to the status of ambassador. Poland has refused to accept an American ambassador for more than a year and, in the past, has suggested to the State Department that such acceptance was contingent on some conciliatory gesture such as restoring fishing rights or flights by Lot, the Polish airline. In addition, diplomats said, the Americans appeared to be attempting to maintain leverage over the Polish Government's actions by making any future relaxation dependent on actions by the Polish authorities. The Polish Government had hoped that the visit of Pope John Paul II last spring, followed by the highly publicized formal scrapping of martial law in July, would bring an end to sanctions and international isolation."
