"President Reagan said today that the Soviet Union was committing ''brutal affronts to the human conscience'' by suppressing freedom at home and waging a ''barbaric war'' in Afghanistan. The President used the occasion of International Human Rights Day to say that the Soviet Union was among those nations that refuse to admit injustices and that justify ''assaults on individual liberty in the name of a chimeric Utopian vision.'' Speaking in the Old Executive Office Building, Mr. Reagan also spoke forcefully against apartheid in calling on South Africa to ''reach out to its black majority by ending the forced removal of blacks from their communities and the detention without trial and lengthy imprisonment of black leaders.'' ''We feel a moral responsibility to speak out on this matter,'' he said in what officials said was a deliberate departure from ''quiet diplomacy,'' responding to criticism of his policy. Elsewhere in his remarks, he took care to praise South Africa for ''constructive changes'' in recent years. In criticizing the Soviet record, the President made no mention of the meeting in Geneva next month between Soviet and American diplomats investigating the possibility of reviving arms control talks. Officials said Mr. Reagan saw no reason to spare the Soviet Union from criticism on human rights. ''I think the President has always dealt in the practicalities of the situation,'' Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman said when asked whether the issues were distinct. ''That is one of the hallmarks of his policy on U.S.- Soviet relations, that we call 'em the way we see 'em.'' Mr. Reagan said ''the critical moral distinction of our time'' was that while there might be human rights abuses within democracies, these can be debated and corrected, in contrast to other governments that refuse to ''admit to such injustices'' and assault liberty in the name of Utopianism. ''Such brutal affronts to the human conscience as the systematic suppression of individual liberty in the Soviet Union, and the denial of religious expression by Christians, Jews and Moslems in that country are tragic examples,'' he said. ''Today, for example, the largest remaining Jewish community in Europe, Soviet Jewry, is again being exposed to a systematic anti-Semitic campaign.'' The President cited the plight of would-be Jewish emigrants who are being denied visas and of dissidents threatened with internment in psychiatric hospitals, and he again called for freedom of movement to be restored to Andrei D. Sakharov, the physicist and rights advocate who is forced to reside in Gorky, a city of a million people on the Volga River. ''Nothing more clearly illustrates the absence of what our Founding Fathers called a 'decent respect for the opinions of mankind' than the cruel treatment of this great humanitarian,'' Mr. Reagan said. Others suffer in Soviet prisons and labor camps, he continued, ''for the sole crimes of expressing a personal opinion, seeking to emigrate, or openly expressing their love of God.'' As part of today's ceremonies, the President met with 12 rights activists from various parts of the world, including Avital Shcharansky, who is the wife of Anatoly B. Shcharansky. An activist in the Jewish emigration movement. Mr. Shcharansky is serving a 13-year sentence on a conviction in July 1978 of espionage for the United States. The President, taking care not to claim that the United States has been free of racism and anti-Semitism, urged the nation to affirm its commitment to brotherhood and injustice. In briefly touching other areas of the world, Mr. Reagan cited ''the persecution of the Bahai religious minority in Iran'' and the suppression of free trade unionism. At the same time, he said he welcomed recent steps taken in Poland to ease the human rights crisis there. ''But we urged that they are followed by lasting efforts for genuine national reconciliation through effective dialogue with the Polish people,'' he added."
