"In his first months as Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev has come across as above all a self-confident man. That quality marked, for example, his recent Time magazine interview, with its brisk extemporaneous replies to hard questions and its knowing references to the West. But the picture of a self-confident leader is difficult to square with a reality of current Soviet life: the intensified persecution of dissidents. The cruelty visited on those who raise even a small voice in dissent - the harsh, even mortal treatment - is at a pitch unequaled in years. All that speaks not of confidence but of paranoia. One story is enough to make the point: enough, one would think, to melt a heart of stone. It is the story of Dr. Anatoly Koryagin, a Soviet psychiatrist who has just passed his 47th birthday in Chistopol Prison. Has, that is, if he is still alive. Dr. Koryagin's crime was to believe in the Hippocratic Oath. As a psychiatrist, he saw patients in mental hospitals who showed no signs of mental illness. They had in fact been put into the hospitals, and there treated with disabling drugs, because they had questioned official truth. In 1979 Dr. Koryagin became consultant to a private organization formed after the Helsinki accords to investigate the abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union. One of this small group's important documents was a meticulous professional report by Dr. Koryagin on his examination of many political patients, published in the British medical journal The Lancet in 1981. (The text, and a description of Dr. Koryagin, appear in an important new book, a collection published by W.H. Freeman, ''The Breaking of Bodies and Minds.'') The world's psychiatrists reacted slowly but with increasing force. In February 1983, faced with condemnation, the Russians withdrew from the World Psychiatric Association. By then, Dr. Koryagin was in prison. He was prosecuted in 1981 for having ''foreign magazines'' in his home and writing anti-Soviet articles. The police described him as an ''ideologically unstable person'' who had fallen under the ''influence of enemies of Soviet power.'' He drew the maximum sentence: seven years' imprisonment, then five in internal exile. In prison, Dr. Koryagin has been treated with exemplary viciousness. He was beaten in his cell, with the door left open so his screams could be heard. When he went on hunger strike to protest the cruelty, he was force-fed. His wife, also a doctor, saw him in September 1983. ''He was like a medusa,'' she wrote afterward, ''so bloated that his neck was wider than his face. It was covered with edemas caused by protein starvation.'' That was two years ago. Since then no member of Dr. Koryagin's family has seen him. But a friend, in a letter written last June that has just reached the West, said he was ''near to death.'' That letter is quoted by Peter Reddaway, a leading British specialist on Soviet affairs, in an article in the current New York Review of Books. It ends by urging doctors everywhere to appeal for Dr. Koryagin's release at once: ''You have the real chance to save a human being's life.'' Anatoly Koryagin is evidently being made an object lesson in what happens to people who effectively disclose Soviet abuses of human rights. Mr. Reddaway suggests that the pressures put on him in prison were designed to make him disavow his own reports of psychiatric abuse - which he has refused to do. The treatment of Dr. Koryagin is a grim example of a general crackdown on dissidents that began before Mr. Gorbachev became leader and has continued to the present. There has been no letup in the cases of the best-known victims, such as Andrei Sakharov, Yuri Orlov and Anatoly Shcharansky. Amnesty International says that four political prisoners at one labor camp have died in the last 16 months - after pleas for their release because of illness had been ignored. Soviet repression has always had a deeply puzzling aspect. How can the people who run that system, with all their power, possibly feel threatened by a Dr. Koryagin? The answer must lie partly in history, in a paranoia that marked Russian society long before the Revolution. No one can expect Mr. Gorbachev to transform the paranoid tradition overnight, assuming that he wants to; he has the prior interest of consolidating his own power. But if he wants to be seen in the West as a self-confident politician, he must begin to act that way with those few of his own people who have begged to differ."
