"The stepson of Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet physicist and human rights advocate, has begun a hunger strike to protest what he says has been Reagan Administration inaction in winning freedom for his father. Alexsey Semyonov, the son from a previous marriage of Yelena G. Bonner, Dr. Sakharov's wife, began the hunger strike on Friday near the Soviet Embassy here. He asserted today that the ''Reagan Administration is only paying lip service to human rights abuses in the Soviet Union'' and that it had not tried hard enough to win Dr. Sakharov's release. ''I don't see any reason to continue working through the State Department,'' he said. ''I don't see them making the effort to contact my parents.'' The State Department declined to comment. Mr. Semyonov said the Administration had been cool to such suggestions as linking the resumption of Aeroflot flights to the United States to the release of his mother and stepfather. All Soviet landing rights in the United States were canceled after Poland imposed martial law in 1981. The Sakharovs were exiled from Moscow to Gorky, a city closed to foreigners, in 1980 after the physicist, who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1975, continued to criticize Soviet policies. His wife was also restricted to Gorky in May 1984. Since June, travelers from Gorky have reported that there is no sign of anyone living in Dr. Sakharov's apartment. Mr. Semyonov has had no contact with the Sakharovs in four months. Videotapes obtained by French and West German journalists indicated that the physicist was being treated in Gorky for heart problems and symptoms of Parkinson's disease. The last film of him was broadcast on July 30 on French television. Mr. Semyonov, who works in Avon, Mass., as a computer programmer, sent a message to the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F. Dobrynin, on Aug. 27 in which he demanded to see the Sakharovs, saying that if he received no reply by Aug. 30 he would begin the hunger strike in front of the embassy. Mr. Semyonov said he would continue his hunger strike until the Soviet authorities allowed him to see his parents."
