"Judged by results, the Helsinki Final Act scarcely merits a 10th anniversary observance in the city where it was signed during the false dawn of detente. The generous hope was that freedoms in the Soviet bloc could be enlarged in exchange for more explicit Western acceptance of the bloc's ''security,'' notably the boundaries securing the partition of Germany. Before the ink was dry, the human rights planks of the accord were scorned by the Kremlin, which made it a crime for Soviet citizens even to monitor compliance. Some Americans, therefore, pronounce the agreements a sham at best, at worst a sellout. And they have a point when they argue that the brazen violations of Helsinki confirm the Soviet Government's contempt for Western-style freedoms. The defect of the accords is that the only redress they offer for violations are periodic review conferences that produce not even muscular protest but only fatuous generalities. But stop and reflect a moment. Strangely and tellingly, those who risk jail to assert the rights of Helsinki do not so airily dismiss the accords. None know better how much the promise has been broken than the dissidents whom the accords have failed to help. Yet these primary victims do not demand their nullification. Why not? Because the accords authorize the Western democracies and their publics to sit in judgment of the previously ''internal'' Soviet system. However powerless, they form a court of world opinion to which victims can and periodically do appeal. Signed by 35 European and North American nations, the Final Act of Helsinki proclaims ''the right of the individual to know and act upon his rights,'' even if his government denies them. Emboldened by Helsinki, dissenters have bravely tried to hold the Communist regimes to account for that promise. They have been harshly repressed, most of all in the Soviet Union. Yet against formidable odds, movements for national, religious and human rights persist, even in the Soviet Union. A compendium by Ludmilla Alexeyeva describes not just the better-known resistance of Jewish refuseniks who seek the Helsinki right of emigration, but also the efforts of Evangelical Christians, Pentecostalists, Seventh-day Adventists and a host of ethnic movements denied self-expression inside the Soviet Union. So, too, in Eastern Europe. Poland's free unionists and nonconformists draw moral support from the Helsinki declarations. Even in repressive Czechoslovakia, a group called Charter 77 manages to survive, publicizing arrests of dissenters and even demanding ''The Right to Information'' in a petition to Parliament. Having encouraged these movements, the West needs to reaffirm their rights and its own right to agitate for freedom. Renouncing Helsinki might satisfy purists but it would snuff out a beacon in dark societies and erase a Soviet commitment to submit to international scrutiny. Secretary of State Shultz was right to go to Finland, to renew Helsinki's promises and to remark how cruelly they have been dishonored."
