"Faith and freedom, as President Reagan aptly put it, are the twin beacons that brighten the American sky this day. Faith in the power of love to conquer cruelty; freedom to pursue the potential of every person and community. It was altogether fitting for Mr. Reagan to join his Christmas prayer to a solemn warning that Americans would, without violence, punish the foes of freedom who desecrate this holiday. First of all in Poland. The President's warnings to Warsaw and Moscow are timely and measured. They still offer a choice: East-West collaboration in rebuilding Polish society or painful sanctions against the strained economies of the entire Soviet bloc. This is, to be sure, intervention, but not to implant America's preference in social systems. It is intervention in defense of civilized values that Communists profess to share - the most basic rights of dissent and conscience. In rebelling against a failed system, the Polish people do not threaten the Warsaw Pact. They demand only workers' rights in a workers' state. If that somehow threatens Soviet ideology, the remedy lies in Soviet reforms, not in the export of martial terror.  Barbarity, like freedom, is contagious. The defeat of Stalinism is the business of every modern state. Believing that there may yet be a path out of the Polish darkness, Mr. Reagan has so far imposed only the mildest sanctions. Yet he was firm in warning of costlier actions if Warsaw and Moscow persist in their war against the Polish people. To enjoy - indeed, depend upon - constructive relations with other peoples, the Communist governments simply have to learn to deal humanely with movements like Solidarity. Today of all days, we recognize that the ideals of freedom are only imperfectly realized on earth. A mere nine years ago, Americans were ruthlessly bombing North Vietnam. One evil, however, does not validate another. To stop judging others would be to let all values disappear. So not only Poland, Mr. President: there are, alas, not enough White House windows to light a candle for all the world's oppressed this Christmas. As in Poland, Governments are now at war with their own people in Guatemala, El Salvador and Afghanistan. In Indonesia, the people of East Timor are still being destroyed with genocidal fury. In South Africa and Iran, protest against appalling suppression and racism is cruelly crushed. These brutalities, too, are defended as ideologically imperative, but all offend faith and freedom. Their perpetrators, too, deserve notice that such crimes against humanity ''will cost them dearly.''"
