"Some Western scientists and scholars attending a meeting in Warsaw late last month sought unsuccessfully to have the conference ''explicitly disassociate'' itself from the Polish Government's repression of demonstrations marking the second anniversary of the independent trade union Solidarity. The attempt was described this week by some participants in the Pugwash Conference on Science and World Affairs, held in the Polish capital from Aug. 26 to 31, with 160 scientists and scholars from 37 countries in attendance. The informants said in telephone interviews that the attempt to include such a disassociation in the final statement of the conference was rejected by its governing body. The demonstrations, called by underground leaders of the suspended trade union, were held on the conference's final day. ''For many of us, the human rights questions raised by the regime's intimidation of the Polish people while we were there became of equal importance to the conference's main theme of averting nuclear war,'' said Murray Thomson, education coordinator in Ottawa of Project Plowshares, a working group on disarmament and development of the Canadian Council of Churches. He and other Western participants charged that there was inadequate discussion of conditions in Poland at the conference and that the Polish Government tried to use the conference to bolster its position. Bernard T. Feld, an American phsyicist and member of the Pugwash governing council, said that the Polish Government tried ''to take advantage'' of the conference's presence in Poland. But Mr. Feld, professor of physics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in Cambridge, also stressed ''the very strong traditional position'' of the Pugwash conferences, founded 25 years ago to provide a prestigious and impartial scientific forum to alert the world to the dangers of nuclear war. The conferences, he said, were ''independent'' and did not discuss the internal matters of host countries. Copies of a letter from Andrei D. Sakharov, the Soviet physicist and dissident, that criticized the Soviet Union for what he described as expansionist military and political policies and violations of human rights were distributed by the council to all conference participants. The letter, which reached the West just before the Pugwash meeting in Warsaw, had been intended for discussion at an earlier anniversary conference in Pugwash, Nova Scotia, site of the first conference in 1957. Mr. Feld said that no attempt was made to ''censor'' the Sakharov letter and that it figured in discussions of the various working groups at the conference. Mr. Thomson agreed, saying ''I don't think there was any deliberate attempt to not talk about the letter,'' except by the Soviet delegation. The Soviet representatives, he said, ''shot down'' a Canadian attempt at one session to have the letter discussed in the context of East-West relations. On Aug. 31, with the smell of tear gas used to quell the disturbances in Warsaw still hanging in the air, Mr. Thomson met with two peace activists from the Netherlands, including Ben Ter Veer of the State University of Groningen, and Jane Sharp, an American who is a visiting scholar in the peace studies program at Cornell University. According to Mr. Thomson and Mr. Ter Veer, the group sent a letter to the 21-member Pugwash governing council, headed by Maciej Nalecz, director of the Institute of Cybernetics at the Polish Academy of Sciences. The letter sought either the inclusion of an explicit disassociation in the conference's closing statement or the cancellation of a final news conference scheduled for Sept. 2 by the council. Mr. Feld confirmed that neither request was granted. But, he said, Mrs. Sharp was present at the final news conference at which, he said, ''the events surrounding the repression of the Solidarity demonstrations were raised.'' The final statement warned that ''detente has been further undermined and the menace of nuclear war has increased'' and alluded to the conference's unanimous adoption of a call by 97 Nobel laureates for a nuclear freeze."
