"The White House announced today what it called ''two limited steps'' easing the economic sanctions against Poland imposed in the days after the imposition of martial law in December 1981. It accompanied this move, however, with a sharp attack on the Polish Government for what it said were the continuing human rights abuses in that country. Reagan Administration officials said the announcement had been held up for two days because of the White House's concern with the critical reaction of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. The labor union has said that no sanctions should be removed until all political prisoners are released and a free labor union restored. The ''limited steps'' announced by Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, were in response, he said, ''to a very modest improvement in the human rights situation in Poland.'' He said these included the successful visit of Pope John Paul II last June to Poland and ''the release of the majority of political prisoners in Poland.'' ''We are waiting for the Polish Government to take definitive action to restore the human rights of the Polish people - rights which belong to them from birth and which are not Government's to take away,'' he said. Curb on Fishing Eased As a result of the steps announced today, Poland will be able to open discussions with private American fishing companies about receiving permission to resume fishing in American waters. The Poles had prior to the imposition of sanctions been allowed to harvest 220,000 tons a year. But Mr. Speakes said that even though talks will be allowed to be held, ''no actual allocation of fish will be provided at this time.'' ''Rather, any future allocation of fish at the end of the discussions will be contingent on the Polish Government's actions on human rights,'' he said. The other step taken was an agreement to join with other Western nations to discuss rescheduling of part of Poland's overall debt of some $11 billion to Western governments. Mr. Speakes emphasized that no new credits were being extended to Poland nor was Poland's entry into the International Monetary Fund being supported. 'Very Serious Problems Remain' The other sanctions remain in place, Mr. Speakes said. These include: suspension of landing rights for the Polish airline LOT, a freeze on new credits, suspension of Poland's ability to receive normal tariff treatment, a ban on sale of high technology items to Poland and suspension of scientific exchanges. Mr. Speakes said ''very serious problems still remain'' in Poland. ''The Polish Government continues to defy the wishes of the majority of the Polish people,'' he said. ''A number of political prisoners are still incarcerated and indictments have been brought against certain of these prisoners, free labor unions have not been rereforms have been implemented and stringent censorship still exists.'' Nevertheless, the limited steps were regarded by State Department officials as a signal of American willingness to continue efforts to normalize relations. Mr. Speakes said, ''In the hope of inducing the Polish Government to begin pursuing a path of national reconciliation and restore free trade unions, the President has endorsed two limited steps.''"
