"After the first week of military rule in Poland, the Reagan Administration said today that the United States continued to view the repression there ''with great concern.'' But a senior State Department official counseled that it would be wrong to conclude that there was no hope for ameliorating the situation. Although the official said that he tended to be pessimistic personally, he added that ''we can't take a doomsday approach'' to the Polish developments. ''I don't think it is justified yet,'' he said. Officially, the State Department, through its spokesman, Dean Fischer, renewed its call to the Polish Government to halt the use of violence and to release the prisoners taken since the imposition of martial law last Sunday. Violation of Helsinki Pact Seen ''We continue to watch events in Poland with great concern, particularly the use of violence against persons who attempt to exercise their civil and political rights,'' Mr. Fischer said, noting that such suppression of rights violated the tenets of the Helsinki agreement of 1975 signed by European nations, including Poland, and the United States and Canada. President Reagan, instead of going to Camp David, the retreat in the nearby Catoctin Mountains of Maryland, stayed at the White House. He is giving a party there for the White House staff on Sunday, and he and Mrs. Reagan are scheduled to act as hosts for a recital in the afternoon that is to be televised later in the day. Vice President Bush convened a meeting today of senior national security advisers, including Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., and Mr. Bush intended to report later to Mr. Reagan on the Polish situation, David Gergen, the director of communications at the White House, said. The senior official said that Lawrence S. Eagleburger, the Assistant Secretary of State for European affairs, would fly to Brussels next week for a meeting with representatives of other allied countries to try to reach a consensus on the current situation, in which Polish forces have carried out a crackdown, but in which so far there has been no widespread bloodshed or direct Soviet military involvement. NATO Ministers May Meet The senior official said that ''if things get worse'' in Poland, Mr. Haig and the other foreign ministers of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization would assemble in emergency session to discuss a unified Western response. ''We are watching this very, very carefully,'' the official said, ''and we are in constant communication on that very subject.'' He said that a meeting would be convened either if the situation in Poland turned into a civil war or if the Soviet Union sent in troops.  The official was asked by a reporter what would happen if Solidarity, the Polish free trade union, was crushed without great bloodshed or Soviet involvement. ''What do you do then, just accept the situation?'' the reporter asked. ''I'm not suggesting for a moment that,'' the official replied.  ''I'm suggesting that we apply all credible levers we have at our disposal to prevent that, and that is what we are attempting to do.  And that outcome is not foreclosed yet, regardless of your theory.  And we don't have the luxury to accept that that outcome is foreclosed.'' Intimidation Is Reported Mr. Fischer said today that in Poland ''increasingly a pattern is emerging of using Polish Army forces to seal off public areas and workplaces from outside interference while the armed security forces of the Ministry of Interior engage in often violent acts of intimidation and repression against protesting workers, students and intellectuals.'' He said there were unconfirmed reports that more than the seven people previously announced had been killed in the southern city of Katowice. ''We call upon the Polish Government to cease its repressive attacks on Polish workers,'' he said. Mr. Fischer said that the situation in Warsaw on Friday was calm and that a funeral for a Solidarity activist who died of natural causes was attended by a crowd of 3,000 that dispersed without incident following the service. ''Our embassy has reported that things are quiet in Warsaw today and there is no evidence of strike activity,'' he said. 'Unprecedented' Gains Cited The senior official, in his briefing, said that ''history hasn't been very reassuring'' given the way in which movements for greater freedom in Hungary and Czechoslovakia were crushed and forgotten by the West. But, he said, ''it is important also to remember some other differences.'' The Poles, he said, had for the last 18 months enjoyed growing freedom and a sharing of power that was ''unprecedented.'' This happened, he said, because the Soviet Union felt it would pay too great a price for suppressing it, and ''that is the question that we should be asking ourselves: has that suddenly disappeared?'' He replied to his own question by saying: ''No, it hasn't disappeared.'' ''And we can't take a doomsday approach to this,'' he said. ''I don't think it is justfied yet.'' Economic Problems Looming Referring to Poland's serious economic problems, the senior official said that ''the thought of carrying this basket case on their back with all the international condemnation around must be a rather harrowing thing for the Soviets.'' ''The thought of having to use Soviet troops to suppress Eastern European populations and the impact that could have must be rather harrowing, too,'' he said."
