"Amnesty International charged today that some governments use human rights as a propaganda ploy while covering up abuses in their own countries or in allied nations. The United States and the Soviet Union were among countries criticized for such reputed manipulations of public opinion in the London-based group's annual report, made public today. Amnesty International, which won a Nobel Peace Prize in 1977 for its human rights work, outlined the charges in the introduction to its 351-page ''Amnesty International Report 1983,'' which covers thousands of reports of rights abuses in 1982. The report said, ''Governments, news media and other institutions have used human rights issues in polemical attacks on other nations while deliberately giving inaccurate public assessments of progress on human rights by their allies.'' Poland, Central America The report said the practice was evident ''in materials issued by various of the parties to conflicts in the Middle East, in interventions by representatives of many governments in the United Nations, in reporting by Soviet news media on, for instance, Poland, in pronouncements by United States officials on patterns of human rights violations in Central America, and in the timing and unprecedented prominence of statements on torture and 'disappearances' in Argentina by political leaders and commentators in the United Kingdom during hostilities in the South Atlantic.'' The rights group said 1,609 prisoners were known to have been put to death around the world in 1982, including both criminals and political prisoners. Amnesty opposes capital punishment. In a three-page entry on the United States, Amnesty said its main concern was the abolition of the death penalty. It said that, at the end of 1982, 1,137 prisoners in the United States were under death sentence, ''the highest figure ever recorded'' in the United States. It also expressed concern about Haitian refugees' difficulties in gaining asylum in the United States. Prisoners of Conscience The five-page entry on the Soviet Union said the group was working on behalf of about 450 prisoners of conscience, and expressed concern about ''the continued imprisonments of prisoners of conscience, allegations of ill-treatment of people detained for political reasons in psychiatric hospitals, harsh conditions suffered by prisoners in penal institutions and the continued use of the death penalty.'' In Afghanistan, where Soviet troops are fighting with Afghan soldiers against an insurgent movement, Amnesty said it had appealed to both sides to halt executions of prisoners, and cited reports of two mass killings in two villages by Government forces. In Iran, Amnesty said it had counted 624 executions in 1982, adding that it ''regards this as a minimum figure.'' It said the Government held thousands of prisoners, and that torture was believed to be ''a routine practice.'' Amnesty criticized Israel for the detention ''with no legal rights'' of thousands of captives in southern Lebanon. Syrian Jailings, Killings Syria, the report said, held over 200 prisoners of conscience and had jailed some people for over 12 years without trial. The Government's reported killing of several thousand people in the town of Hama was an ''extrajudicial execution,'' it said. In Latin America, Amnesty cited widespread disappearances of government opponents, especially in Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras and Mexico. Amnesty charged that in El Salvador ''all branches of the security forces were involved in a systematic and widespread program of torture, abduction and individual and mass killings of men, women and children.'' The organization said it also received reports of ''violent crimes against individuals by opposition forces.'' South Africa's Government was criticized for imprisoning political opponents at home and in the territory of South-West Africa. The report said more than 100 political detainees in the territory had been held incommunicado for five years."
