"This is a column about two physicists, or more accurately about two human beings who happen to be physicists. They are from countries far apart in miles and in politics. They do not know each other. What they have in common, apart from their science, is their experience of that contemporary phenomenon: the terrorism of the state. Vladimir Kislik comes from Kiev, in the Soviet Union. He is a Jew, and in 1973 he applied for an exit visa to emigrate to Israel. His wife and son were allowed to go. He was refused permission - and entered a nightmare life. Mr. Kislik immediately lost his position at the Institute of Physics of the Ukranian Academy of Sciences. He took menial jobs and was fired from them. He was arrested for vagrancy. Foreign scientists who visited him at home were assaulted by ruffians on the street. Last July, during the Olympics, he was put in jail for 15 days.  There he had a heart attack. He was sent to a psychiatric hospital, where he was put in a ward with dangerous psychotics. Friends got word to the outside world, and groups in France and the United States sent strong protests to Soviet authorities. Mr. Kislik was released. Recently he was arrested again. According to reports from Kiev, he is about to go on trial on a charge of ''hooliganism.'' That carries a sentence of up to five years in a labor camp. Elena Sevilla is a physicist from Argentina. She had a baby by Caesarean section in November 1975. Five days later she was arrested in her hospital bed. No charge was made, then or afterward. In January 1976, an Argentine judge ordered her released. But the authorities did not let her go, instead placing her under indefinite detention without charge. Her child was given to her parents. She was put under a strict prison regimen: allowed almost nothing to read, kept in her cell 23 hours a day. There were protests from groups abroad, just as in Mr. Kislik's case: from the American Physical Society, the National Academy of Sciences, Amnesty International. Elena Sevilla was luckier than Mr.  Kislik. After three years she was released and allowed to leave the country. She is now studying at Cornell. Of course these two are not the only scientists who have been victims of their governments. In the Soviet Union, Anatoly Shcharansky is wasting away in solitary prison confinement, reportedly near death. Yuri Orlov is serving a seven-year sentence in a labor camp. Andrei Sakharov is in internal exile. The scientist victims in Argentina are less familiar to us, but their stories are no less chilling. Federico Eduardo Alvarez Rojas, a well-known physicist, and his wife Hilda Graciela were seized by armed men in 1976 in front of their three young children; though once reported to have been seen in a prison, they have never been officially accounted for. American physicists know of at least 16 other of their Argentine colleagues who have similarly ''disappeared.'' The stories of Vladimir Kislik and Elena Sevilla and the others make a simple but fundamental point: the indivisibility of concern for humanity. State brutality and terrorism are evils - absolute evils - whether practiced in one corner of the world or another, one political system or another. John Donne made the point to us as individuals 350 years ago. The passage best remembered is: ''Never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.'' But he also put it another way: ''Any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind.'' In today's world the point is not just individual or spiritual but political. If we close our eyes to official brutality here or there - in the Soviet Union or Argentina, in Uganda or Cambodia -we risk our own civilization. Scientists have tended to understand that, supporting their threatened colleagues everywhere. Governments are another question. The question is especially acute now, as the new American Administration proposes what amounts to a double standard for human rights. It would focus attention on the cruelties of Communist governments and wink at the horrors done by ''friendly'' right-wing regimes. Ironically, victims of Soviet repression - at least some of the more prominent among them - do not seem to want a one-dimensional American policy. Pavel Litvinov, a dissident who got out, said when I asked him that his attention naturally centered on events in the Soviet bloc, ''but I believe very strongly in the principle of human rights everywhere. I care about Argentina.'' Five years ago this week some brave Soviet citizens set up a Moscow group to monitor observance of the rights supposedly gained in the Helsinki agreements. Most are now in prison or forced exile. Their spokesman in America, Ludmilla Alexeyeva, said: ''The United States has achieved respectability and credibility in speaking out publicly and forcefully against human rights violations around the world. A continuation of this universal policy is essential to the human rights movement in the Soviet Union.''"
