"FOR THE RECORD Selected Statements 1977-1980.  By Henry Kissinger.  332 pp. Boston: Little, Brown & Co. $12.95. By GADDIS SMITH WHERE would we be now if there had been no Carter Administration and if Henry Kissinger had remained the directing mind behind American foreign policy? And what will be the shape of foreign policy in the years ahead if, as seems probable, Mr. Kissinger's ideas are again ascendant? The former Secretary of State's own answers to these questions are implicit in this collection of articles, speeches, interviews and testimony - a record of his thoughts since he left office in January 1977. Experienced Kissinger-watchers will find nothing surprising here; nevertheless, since the pieces all stem from the belief that only Great Powers count, the book serves as an elegant and succinct guide to realpolitik. The familiar central message would bring nods of warm assent from American Cold Warriors of the Korean War era: The United States must manage all of its affairs - its attitude toward human rights, relations with allies, arms control, energy policy, its response to the third world - so as to increase its power in relationship to the Soviet Union. We must banish all sentimentality from our foreign policy, especially the belief that the moral values of individuals can be applied to international relations. Power to contain Soviet expansionism, not peace for its own sake, must be the nation's strategic objective, its vision of the future. The earlier pieces, written in 1977 and 1978, are Olympian in tone. The old veteran does not want to criticize lest he add to the difficulties of the neophytes who are trying so sincerely to do the right thing. But the 1979 and 1980 pieces, written in the context of the fall of the Shah, the debate over SALT II and the approaching Presidential election, are more strident. Mr. Kissinger charges the Carter Administration with abandoning a loyal friend (the Shah), undermining American military power by unilaterally forgoing such weapons systems as the neutron bomb, failing to stop Soviet adventures and generally creating a situation of extreme danger. His opinions about Iran and the Shah are part of his larger criticism of the Carter Administration for failing to accept the argument that the end justifies the means on issues of human rights.  Mr. Kissinger tells us that we should distinguish between authoritarian regimes that trample on human rights because they are threatened by subversion or external pressure and totalitarian regimes that deny human rights as a matter of ideology. Although he admits that the Shah's regime was not perfect, he implies that the Carter Administration must bear the responsibility for the Shah's collapse. The Shah, Mr. Kissinger says, embarked on liberal reforms in the belief that he could not otherwise retain American support, losing control of the situation and his throne in the bargain. The naked message beneath the verbiage is that we should urge more repression, not less, when ''friendly'' despots begin to wobble in the face of an incipient revolution. Mr. Kissinger also argues that a concern for human rights, which can cause us to withdraw support --------------------------------------------------------------------- Gaddis Smith, author of a book on Secretary of State Dean Acheson, teaches at Yale. from regimes that do not meet our standards, can raise that dread monster of isolationism. Mr. Kissinger testified in favor of the SALT II treaty, but his approval was so adorned with criticism of the Carter Administration that his words provided powerful ammunition for the opponents. SALT II, he argued, should be accompanied by a great increase in American military power. We must also abandon the principle of agreed mutual vulnerability, which has been a foundation of strategic arms control negotiations since SALT I. While admitting that he once helped frame the ''amazing theory ... that vulnerability contributed to peace and invulnerability contributed to risks of war,'' he now sneers at that notion. The renunciation of this theory is based on the even more amazing assumption that strategic invulnerability can be attained and that a race toward invulnerability does not mean an increased risk of nuclear war. Mr. Kissinger asserts that the fate of the world depends on the ability of the United States and its allies to maintain a balance of power with the Soviet Union. This may well be true, but it does not follow that this balance of power will alone determine the fate of the world or that every American policy should be linked to that one issue. Mr. Kissinger wants complete linkage. He shows little sympathy for the viewpoint of third world leaders, but at the same time attaches ultimate significance to what the Soviet Union or a Soviet proxy such as Cuba may do in the third world. ''Had we succeeded in Angola,'' he writes, ''there would have been no Ethiopia. ... I think this was one of the decisive watersheds.'' He compares recent failures to stop Soviet adventures in the third world to the French and British failure to stop Hitler's reoccupation of the Rhineland in 1936 - the last, lost chance to prevent World War II. That is nothing but a variation, equally dubious, of the Munich analogy so often advanced by proponents of the American war in Vietnam. Carter's Panama treaties and the Camp David accords receive Mr.  Kissinger's approval. But overall he indicts the late Administration for being naive and hopeful jellyfish. Remember, he tells us, those who ''try to avoid difficult choices by making comfortable assumptions about the future win no awards for restraint; they only speed their own demise.'' In short, we must assume the worst. The most eloquent essay - Mr. Kissinger's oration at the funeral of his patron and friend, Nelson Rockefeller - stands alone, quite out of character with the rest of the book. Here Mr. Kissinger recalls that Rockefeller in his final years ''would say, because I needed it, but, above all, because he deeply felt it: 'Never forget that the most profound force in the world is love.' '' Aside from this moment, with its poignant self-awareness, there is little love in these essays or in the world view the author advances. Love divorced from power, Mr. Kissinger is saying, may be a profound force, profoundly dangerous. Those who walk the path of love walk to destruction."
