"After a five-week holiday break, the conference on human rights and East-West cooperation in Europe resumed today in an acrimonious mood, with the United States accusing the Soviet Union of fresh rights violations and the Russians raising the possibility of scuttling the 1975 Helsinki accords, under review here, if this conference is not followed by one on disarmament. Max M. Kampelman of the United States said detente ''does not today exist as an accurate description of East-West relations.'' He listed nine trials and two arrests of dissenters in the Soviet Union in the last five weeks. Mr. Kampelman, a Washington lawyer with close ties to American Jewish organizations, has been taking a hard line on the Soviet Union. Though appointed by the Carter Administration, he is believed to have a strong chance of retaining his post under President Reagan. Griffin D. Bell, the former Attorney General, has resigned as delegation leader. Mr. Kampelman is expected to go to Washington this week to meet with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. An issue that remains undecided is the United States' posture toward a French proposal to strengthen ''confidence-building measures'' between the Soviet bloc's Warsaw Pact and the Atlantic alliance. The French plan would make prior notification of maneuvers compulsory, instead of the voluntary practice under the Helsinki accords. It would also extend the existing 150-mile range of notification far into the Soviet Union to the Ural Mountains, the conventional eastern boundary of Europe. The French plan has been endorsed by members of the Atlantic alliance except the United States. At today's session, Leonid F. Ilyichev of the Soviet Union said the French proposal and others contained ''elements'' that were acceptable to Moscow. But he also said that failure to convene a post-Madrid conference on disarmament would jeopardize the holding of another meeting to review the Helsinki accords. The Atlantic alliance has taken the position that the proposal for a disarmament conference, to be held later this year in Warsaw, is a propaganda device. They consider it unrealistic to enter into openended disarmament talks while Soviet troops remain in Afghanistan. Moreover, such a disarmament meeting, viewed by its advocates as the second phase of the Madrid conference, would not allow the raising of such questions as human rights violations. The first meeting to review the 1975 Helsinki accords was held in Belgrade in 1977-78. The Madrid meeting is the second, and Rumania and Belgium have offered to be hosts for a third. The Soviet Union has long regarded the accords as constituting the equivalent of a treaty ending World War II and recognizing the European boundaries that emerged from the conflict."
