"President Reagan said today that Soviet-American relations would continue to feel the impact of human rights issues. But in his annual speech marking International Human Rights Day, he abandoned the harsh tone with which he has previously denounced rights violations by the Soviet Union. ''Make no mistake about it,'' he said. ''Human rights will continue to have a profound effect on the United States-Soviet relationship as a whole because they are fundamental to our vision of an enduring peace.'' But he avoided mentioning particular dissidents, obstacles to Jewish emigration or other specific problems, as he has in the past. He adopted an approach that reflected his new strategy of pressing Soviet leaders privately and quietly on these issues in the hope, Administration officials said, that Moscow will not feel it has to resist because it is being publicly bludgeoned. Last month in Geneva, the President was reported to have spent more than an hour on the subject with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader. 'Americans Will Be Watching' ''I made it very clear to him that human rights are an abiding concern of the American people,'' Mr. Reagan said. ''We had a long and confidential discussion. And at the conclusion of our meetings, we declared in a joint statement that humanitarian issues would be resolved in as humanitarian spirit. Americans will be watching hopefully to see whether that pledge is observed.'' The President spoke in the Executive Office Building, adjacent to the White House, to a group of about 85 invited guests from various ethnic and religious organizations active in human rights causes. His strongest criticism of the Soviet Union was reserved for the war in Afghanistan, where, he said, 120,000 Soviet troops remain six years after the intervention. ''They have slaughtered innocent women and children,'' the President said. ''They have employed poison gas. And they have loaded toys with small explosives in an attempt to demoralize people by crippling Afghan children.'' Mr. Reagan condemned rights violations in Cambodia, where ''the Communist rulers of Vietnam have launched vicious attacks upon Cambodian refugees,'' he said. ''In Ethiopia,'' he said, ''a Marxist Government has used famine to punish large segments of its own population.'' Criticizes Eastern Bloc He denounced Poland's continued ban on the independent trade union, Solidarity; Rumania's religious persecution, which he said ''includes the destruction of Bibles,'' and Bulgaria's ''repression of the Turkish minority and the Islamic faith.'' He called Cuba the Western Hemisphere's worst example of ''the country where institutionalized totalitarianism has consistently violated the rights of the citizens.'' And he added, ''Unfortunately, the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua seems determined to embark on the same course.'' Although most of his complaints were directed against Communist governments, he said that ''in Chile and the Philippines, too, we have shown our strong concern with our friends who deviate from a strongly established democratic tradition.'' He denounced South Africa as well. ''The inhuman policy of apartheid continues,'' he said, citing the granting of ''essentially unlimited powers'' to the police and the arrest of thousands of South Africans who have been ''denied even elementary judicial protection.'' Mr. Reagan expressed impatience with the South African Government. ''I have said that apartheid is abhorrent,'' he said. ''It is time that the Government of South Africa took steps to end it and to reach out for compromise and reconciliation to end the turmoil in that strife-torn land.'' The President gave special attention to what he called Iran's ''rampant religious persecution'' of Bahais, members of a religion founded in the 19th century and dedicated to the concept of the unity of all religions and all mankind. ''Since 1979,'' he said, ''198 Bahais have been put to death. Seven hundred sixty-seven are in prison, some 10,000 made homeless, and over 25,000 forced to flee their country.''"
