"Two letters from dissidents accusing Soviet leaders of violating religious rights were made available today at the Sixth Assembly of the World Council of Churches. The letters, sent to the Council's general secretary, Dr. Philip Potter, and several other Council officials, called on the assembly to speak out in protest against Soviet repression and in support of those who suffer because of it. A spokesman for the Council said the matter would not be taken up in the assembly. The sources of the letters were identified in the texts as Vladimir Rusak, a deacon of the Russian Orthodox Church, and a dissident group called the Christian Committee for the Defense of Believers in the U.S.S.R. Copies of the letters were made available by people who said they wanted to focus public attention on the matter. Will Respond Privately Ninan Koshy, director of international affairs for the Council, said that Dr. Potter would respond privately to the letters in ''due course'' but added that the matter would not be addressed in the current meetings because ''it is not part of the assembly business.'' Mr. Koshy said the letters were included in a large volume of appeals sent to the assembly from various individuals and groups. He said Dr. Potter would respond to all such pleas, adding that ''the action and policy of the Council in regard to the issues'' raised in the letters. The letters revived a debate over human rights that has involved the Council in recent years. Some critics charge that the Council is quick to condemn certain Governments, like South Africa's, for abusing human and religous rights but takes a much softer line toward violations in Communist countries. Council officials have often explained the difference in terms of a need for a variety of approaches suited to particular conditions. In the case of the Soviet Union, the officials argue, the most effective method is to work quietly behind the scenes through the Russian Orthodox Church, which belongs to the Council. They also say outspoken attacks on the Soviet Union would worsen the situation of religious followers in the Soviet Union. Orthodox Leadership Criticized The dissidents' letters address those issues, accusing the Russian Orthodox leadership of failing to speak out on behalf of Christians and charging that the Russian delegation to the 18-day assembly is being used for propaganda purposes by the Soviet Government. Both letters charged the Soviet Government with harassing religious believers and trying to crush all religious activity not explicitly sanctioned by the Government. The committee letter specified several abuses and accused Soviet authorities of ''implementing a policy of genocide'' against believers. The Soviet committee was founded in 1976 by Gleb Yakunin, a priest who sent a similar appeal to the last World Council assembly in 1975 in Nairobi. That letter was used as evidence at a trial in 1979 at which he was sentenced to five years in a labor camp. 'Dare Not Remain Silent' Noting the case of Mr. Yakunin, Mr. Rusak said he did not ''delude myself that there is much likelihood that my letter will be read out loud at one of the assembly's sessions.'' ''It is very difficult for us to reach you,'' he added, ''much more difficult than to reach God. Still, I dare not remain silent.'' Mr. Rusak, a church historian with considerable theological training, said the Soviet delegation to the assembly did not truly represent the Russian Orthodox Church. ''The aim of the Soviet authorities in using the church is purely propagandistic,'' he said. The letter detailed five types of repressive tactics that it says the Soviet authorities have used against believers. They include the refusal to allow 20,000 Pentecostals to leave the country in order to practice their religion freely and the recent arrest of three Jews for holding a prayer service outside an approved area."
