"To the Editor: In defending his recent statements on Argentina, David Rockefeller (letter Dec. 5) unfortunately puts forth a rationale which is an implicit justification of torture, abductions and other violations of basic human rights. he argument made by Mr. Rockefeller, and increasingly made in defense of a variety of repressive regimes, goes like this: A government faced with political terrorism is faced with the equivalent of civil war, in which abuses and injustices are ''inevitable''; one result of the government's efforts to halt that terrorism has been the reduction of inflation, and for this and for other benefits that have accrued from its campaign, the government merits encouragement. The argument is factually incorrect with regard to Argentina. It is also incompatible with the very concept of human rights and international instruments protecting them to which Argentina and most other repressive regimes have agreed. The Argentine Government, faced with a severe crisis of political violence and economic instability in 1976, chose to respond with a campaign of official terror which soon far surpassed in horror that of the most ruthless private groups. Thousands of individuals were arrested and imprisoned without charges or trials. Thousands more -perhaps as many as 15,000 men, women and children - simply ''disappeared'' after arrest by security forces and have never been accounted for. Those who managed to escape or obtain release report that they had been taken to secret camps where torture by electric shock or sexual abu se was - and is - routine and where killings are widespread, wi th Jews being subjected to particularly brutal treatment. The evidence is overwhelming that these acts are not abuses of policy but rather policy itself. Nor is there evidence that such policies have changed and that the Government ''is trying to rectify the injustices that have occurred.'' Rather, there is a step-up of public relations abroad and promotion of tourism and investment. More than 1,000 prisoners are still being held without charges. The only response of the Government to the thousands who seek news of loved ones abducted by security forces has been allowing the missing to be declared dead after five years. No member of the security forces has ever been prosecuted for torture or murder, and the disappearances continue. From September 1979 to August 1980, Amnesty International received news of 58 disappearances. The actual number is almost certainly much higher. Can it really be Mr. Rockefeller's view that these policies of systematic torture, widespread abductions, imprisonment without trial and political killings were or are ''inevitable.'' Certainly this is not the view embodied in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which holds that even in ''times of public emergency which threatens the life of the nation'' torture and killings are forbidden. This standard, which Mr. Rockefeller is reluctant to impose, is not simply a United States standard, it is a universal standard which the Argentine Government has agreed to uphold. It is not the role of Amnesty International to assess the accuracy of Mr. Rockefeller's statement on Argentina's economy or to discuss methods for controlling inflation. It is, however, our obligation to point out that the destruction of fundamental freedoms, and the torture, killing and ''disappearance'' of thousands of human beings, can never be an acceptable means for lowering the rate of inflation or increasing foreign exchange. Whatever his intentions, in advancing the argument that ''Argentina has made enormous strides under a military regime'' without condemning the methods it continues to employ, David Rockefeller is not only ''lending comfort to evil'' - a charge he attempted to dispel with his letter - he is encouraging it in Argentina, elsewhere throughout the world and particularly in nearby Guatemala and El Salvador.  VINCENT MCGEE Chairman, Amnesty International U.S.A.  New York, Dec. 9, 1980"
