"Vice President Bush told Salvadoran officials tonight that if the Government here did not ''honor basic human decencies'' it would ''lose that crucial battle for the support and approval of the people.'' Mr. Bush made his statement during a dinner toast that stressed the Salvadoran Government's need to take action against right-wing death squads. ''I ask you as a friend not to make the mistake of thinking there's any division in my country on this question,'' he said. ''It is not just the President, it is not just me or the Congress. If these death-squad murders continue, you will lose the support of the American people and that would indeed be a tragedy.'' The Vice President called ''right- wing fanatics'' the ''best friends the Soviets, the Cubans, the Sandinista comandantes and the Salvadoran guerrillas have.'' ''These cowardly death-squad terrorists are just as repugnant to me, to President Reagan, to the U.S. Congress and to the American people as the terrorists of the left,'' he said. 'Murders Must Stop' Later, in a departure statement before leaving for Washington, Mr. Bush again called the problem of the death squads ''one of the most urgent problems'' in El Salvador. ''We all agree that the death-squad murders must stop,'' he said. Mr. Bush also called on leftists guerillas to ''abandon their antidemocratic and unrealistic insistence on power sharing.'' Roberto d'Aubuisson, the leader of the far right, who recently was denied a visa to the United States because of his association with death squads, was invited to the dinner with other Salvadoran Government officials but declined to attend. Vice President Bush, on arriving here from Argentina, said earlier in the day that human rights were being threatened in El Salvador by ''extremists of both the left and the right.'' But his arrival statement, rather than stressing the theme of human rights and a need to curb right-wing terrorism, as Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth W. Dam and Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering have done recently, emphasized the need to counter ''Communist aggression.'' ''The Communists promise to trade material well-being for freedom,'' he said. ''But we have seen time and time again that Communist enslavement only brings more poverty.'' Six Hours of Meetings Mr. Bush, who arrived at 2 P.M., held six hours of meetings with the provisional President, Alvaro Magana, the country's Defense Minister and representatives of all six political parties. The Vice President was also expected to meet with Mr. d'Aubuisson, the leader of the far-right National Republican Alliance. Mr. Bush came to El Salvador at a time when the country is preparing for presidential elections scheduled for March 25.  Mr. d'Aubuisson is expected to be the candidate for his party. The moderate Christian Democrats have Jose Napoleon Duarte as their candidate, and today Jose Francisco Guerrero was chosen to run for the conservative National Reconciliation Party. Mr. Guerrero, a former Foreign Minister who is now the President's chief aide, has been characterized by several American Embassy officials as the most ''acceptable'' candidate. These officials, who acknowledge that Mr. Guerrero's prospects of winning are slight, are concerned that a victory by either Mr. d'Aubuisson or Mr. Duarte could polarize the nation. Scattered Guerrilla Fighting There was only scattered guerrilla fighting in the eastern part of the country today. But the Popular Liberation Forces, the largest guerrilla group and formerly the most militant, announced that a splinter group had broken off to form a sixth guerrilla group operating in El Salvador. The Popular Liberation Forces moderated its political and military doctrine to conform more closely with the other four guerrilla groups after the apparent suicide of its leader, Salvador Cayetano Carpio, last spring. The new group, known as the Salvador Cayetano Carpio Revolutionary Workers Movement, has indicated it will follow the former guerrilla leader's more militant line. In a special radio broadcast today, the Popular Liberation Forces expressed strong criticism of the new group and Mr. Carpio. It accused the late guerrilla leader of having ordered the assassination of his deputy, Melida Anaya Montes, last spring."
