"Despite American objections, the General Assembly adopted resolutions today accusing El Salvador, Chile and Guatemala of human rights violations. The annual human rights debate, which lasted 10 days, centered on these three nations, as it has in previous years. The resolutions all expressed concern for violations of human rights in each country and called on their Governments to ''take effective measures'' to insure ''fundamental freedoms.'' The vote on the resolution on El Salvador was 78 to 13 with 41 abstentions; on the Guatemala resolution, 80 to 14 with 36 abstentions, and on Chile, 86 to 15 with 36 abstentions. Several European countries, including the Netherlands, Sweden, Greece, Norway, Spain, Italy and France, joined Cuba, Mexico and Yugoslavia in sponsoring some or all of of the resolutions. The United States called the resolutions ''unbalanced and one- sided.'' ''It is true that we would like to condemn other countries,'' Edward Craanen, a spokesman for the Netherlands said. ''But because of the political constellation of the United Nations, it isn't possible.'' A representative of Sweden pointed out that his delegation's speeches urged the General Assembly to examine human rights more evenhandedly. In a speech Thursday night, the United States chief delegate, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, asked why only Chile, El Salvador and Guatemala were criticized when, she said, there were other countries in the region - she mentioned Cuba - whose human rights record was worse. There are, Mrs. Kirkpatrick contended, more political prisoners, less freedom of the press and less judicial independence in Cuba than in Chile. ''Trade union rights are limited in Chile and we deplore that fact, but they are nonexistent in Cuba,'' she said. Mrs. Kirkpatrick went on, ''Chile is a focus of attention in this body, therefore, not because of human rights concerns but - let us be clear - because it is a political target.'' While much of the discussion in the last 10 days was on the three Latin American countries, delegations used the occasion to criticize abuses elsewhere. The United States, for example, in a speech last week, detailed the Soviet use of psychiatric hospitals for political repression. The Netherlands representative accused dictatorships of the left and right, including Poland, Cuba, Chile and Guatemala, of serious rights abuses. The Chilean delegate, Manuel Trucco, said Amnesty International's report last year cited human rights violations in 117 countries. Among them, he went on, were several of the co-sponsors of the resolutions. For their part, the Soviet Union's representative said that the United States was totalitarian and imperialist. It was, he said, ''characterized by frenzied anti-Communism, racism and hatred for anything progressive.'' Reagan Criticizes El Salvador WASHINGTON, Dec. 9 (AP) - President Reagan, indirectly criticizing El Salvador, said today, ''We cannot believe in human rights and ignore the activities of death squads in some Central American countries.'' At a human rights ceremony, he cited the Soviet Union, Iran, South Africa, Poland and Nicaragua for human rights violations but he did not mention El Salvador by name. When Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, was asked which countries Mr. Reagan was referring to, he said, ''Particularly El Salvador.'' The President proclaimed Saturday, the 35th anniversary of the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as Human Rights Day in the United States. He suggested that people who live in free nations sometimes ''forget the richness of our precious possession'' because freedom is invisible. ''There are no walls, no troops or guns to prevent us from traveling,'' he said. ''People who live in tyranny, however, can see freedom much more clearly,'' he said. ''It shines like a candle in the midst of darkness. And America's freedom shines through a world of stormy seas, giving hope to tens of millions of people for a better way of life.''"
