"Break out the champagne for Argentina. A great country, blessed with human and natural riches, returns today to the democratic fold after eight ruinous years of military dictatorships. But credit the departing generals with a sense of drama. Perhaps by inspired design, they chose to have the elected President, Raul Alfonsin, inaugurated on Dec. 10: Human Rights Day. Alas, this symbolism escaped the Reagan Administration. Its inaugural gift to a democratic and civilian Government was the end of America's arms embargo, which Mr. Alfonsin did not request. A better gift would have been a belated confession that Jimmy Carter's human rights policy made a crucial difference in Argentina. Principles are practical: they kept alive the promise now realized in Buenos Aires. There is no better witness than Mr. Alfonsin. When a repressive junta resorted to terrorism in the name of battling terrorism, its ''dirty war'' claimed at least 6,000 lives. The press was mostly silenced and among political leaders only Mr. Alfonsin dared to join a small human rights commission that protested the official barbarism. The rampage reached its peak in 1976, the year in which Congress for the first time tied human rights strings to America's military and economic aid. It was a risky and disputed attempt to harness principle to diplomacy. But would it work? As administered by President Carter in important cases, it plainly did. According to Mr. Alfonsin, thousands were saved in Argentina because the United States openly expressed its concern. Patricia Derian, the State Department's first human rights monitor, encouraged the United States Embassy in Buenos Aires to become an information center for the families of the ''disappeared.'' She was denounced as a meddler by the junta and its American friends, but she and all America are remembered by the democrats who now govern as gallant allies. Argentina's new dawn also has its threatening clouds: $40 billion in foreign debt; an unresolved quarrel with Britain over the Falklands; a territorial dispute with Chile; a potential clash with entrenched Peronist trade union bosses, and a looming quarrel over prosecuting military officers for the ''dirty war.'' But when Argentina and the United States speak the same democratic language, all other problems seem manageable."
