"When diplomats risk their jobs by asserting unwelcome truths, they deserve an award - a Wotton Cup, after Sir Henry Wotton, the British envoy who said an ambassador is an honest man ''sent to lie abroad for the good of his country.'' He was fired by an unamused King James I. Two obvious candidates for a Wotton Cup are Robert White and Deane Hinton, who lost their jobs in El Salvador by stating the unwelcome truth that crimes against human rights there routinely went unpunished because they were mostly perpetrated by ''our'' allies in the security forces. It tells a lot about American frustration that President Reagan's latest man in San Salvador, Thomas Pickering, is now sounding the same note. Observing a surge of murders by death squads - and threats even against El Salvador's Archbishop - Ambassador Pickering said pointedly the other day that the human rights scandal jeopardizes ''the sort of support that the Administration and many members of Congress would like to give.'' An unnamed aide added what everyone knows: that the death squads are composed of active and America's Diplomats Had Good Reason To Be Undiplomatic former army and security officers serving the interests of the far right.  Mr. Hinton was even blunter a year ago when he described El Salvador's legal system as ''rotten.'' He condemned right-wing ''thugs'' and warned that American aid would end if midnight murders did not cease. But the White House disowned the warning and finally removed Mr. Hinton, as it had removed his predecessor, Mr. White. A Carter appointee, Mr. White had openly disputed the Reagan team's confidence that El Salvador would prosecute the murderers of four American churchwomen. Three years later, the suspects are still at large. So are those who killed two American labor advisers and a Salvadoran peasant leader in 1981.  Death squads have been responsible for a large proportion of the tens of thousands of murders of civilians. Yet in no known instance has an army officer been brought to justice. Every American envoy reaches the obvious conclusion that these outrages damage the Government's struggle against insurgents. Yet the same struggle leaves Washington unwilling to punish its allies. No matter what the diplomats say, American aid keeps coming; Mr. Pickering's warning last week was followed by a Pentagon plea for more aid. It seems to be only dawning on the Administration that it is caught in a trap of its own design. Its shocked officials now concede that the situation has not improved and they threaten to deport wealthy Salvadoran exiles in Miami who are the death squads' paymasters. ''We've had it with these guys,'' says a Washington official. As should have been obvious all along, those outspoken ambassadors were not rocking the boat, only trying to change course. For the good of their country, they declined to lie abroad. If President Reagan would acknowledge as much it would add to his stature as well as theirs."
