"In a series of conciliatory steps the Sandinista Government of Nicaragua has now reached plans for an amnesty for many of its ''counterrevolutionary'' opponents and for an election in 1985 in which they could take part. Whether the Reagan Administration will respond in kind remains to be seen; but the precedents are not good. In the euphoric glow of their magnificent victory over Grenada, the Reaganites have been acting as if they can push the Sandinistas into more concessions by constantly increasing military pressures. Maybe so. But that's a dangerous game; in October, for example, the C.I.A.-financed and -directed Nicaraguan Democratic Force (the so-called contras) threatened to sink Mexican oil tankers offloading crude for Nicaragua at Puerto Sandino. The contras claim to have mined the waters of the port, and Mexico clearly would blame the U.S. for any such sinkings. Anti-Sandinista groups, moreover, already have engaged in firefights with Nicaraguan forces back and forth across the Honduran and Costa Rican borders. A Central American war could erupt from just such flashpoints; and it could hardly fail to involve American troops, of which about 3,500 are already in Honduras. Aside from such dangers, the Administration's bully-boy approach in Nicaragua offers a grim reminder of the gringo interventionism the Latin nations have learned to fear. That's one reason the U.S. is losing long-term respect and standing in Latin America; another is the Administration's ambivalent attitude toward right-wing violence in El Salvador and elsewhere in the Caribbean basin. Just as Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth Dam was saying in Miami, for instance, that right-wing terrorists ''helped pave the way'' for Marxism in the Caribbean region, President Reagan was saying in Washington that some supposedly right-wing murders in El Salvador might actually have been committed by leftist guerrillas.  The apparent conflict raised again the question of whether this Administration really knows what it's doing in Central America.  Why, for example, orchestrate the recent American chorus of criticism against the odious El Salvadoran ''death squads'' when the President then vetoes a bill making further aid to that country contingent on its improving its human rights record? Why, for another, should Undersecretary of Defense Fred C. Ikle, after a visit to El Salvador, denounce the right-wing death squads for undermining the war against guerrilla insurgents - then demand more aid for the government he says fails to stamp out the death squads that are undermining its efforts?  Mr. Ikle said on a television program that denying aid to the Salvadoran Government would alienate and weaken it, and therefore probably encourage death squad activity. But under that kind of rationale, why refuse a visa to the Salvadoran rightist leader, Roberto d'Aubuisson, to visit the U.S., on grounds of Administration concern about the death squads? Won't that tend to alienate other Salvadoran rightists, make Mr. d'Aubuisson something of a martyr, enhance his chances for election to the presidency next March and thus strengthen the death squads, of which he is thought to be a supporter, if not a leader? The White House lamely explained that Mr. Reagan vetoed the bill because of its requirement that he semiannually certify to Congress that there have been improvements in El Salvador's human rights record, one of the worst in the world. This requirement, a spokesman said, would ''distort our efforts'' to gain such improvements; but the Administration, he said, would continue to work with Salvadoran leaders to end the ''reprehensible activities of the violent right and the violent left.'' Poppycock. That kind of ''work'' with those very leaders - including Mr. d'Aubuisson, the Constituent Assembly president - has persistently failed to make any improvement whatever in their concern for human rights or the death squads that Mr. Ikle and other American officials have belatedly been denouncing. As for the greater aid to El Salvador proposed by Mr. Ikle, if that were the right medicine for the Administration's losing efforts there, does the President really think that Congress will provide more money now that he's killed the requirement that aid be contingent on human rights improvements? That was Congress's hedge against underwriting human rights abuses; though it was a provision easily circumvented, it was one Congress had the right and duty to impose. Congress is out of session and will have no chance to override Mr. Reagan's pocket veto. When it returns in January, a new attempt undoubtedly will be made to tie aid to El Salvador to progress on human rights. By then, however, the situation might be markedly worse as the arrogant Salvadoran rightists draw the conclusion that the Administration really doesn't care about the death squads."
