"Nicaragua is about to offer amnesty to prisoners jailed for crimes against state security, according to diplomats, opposition figures and a senior Sandinista official. They said the Government also planned to tell anti-Sandinista rebels that if they lay down their arms they can return home without punishment. In addition, diplomats and opposition leaders said they expected the Sandinistas to announce a new program soon aimed at bringing Miskito Indian refugees back from self-exile in Honduras and investing substantial amounts in development of the Miskito area in eastern Nicaragua. The reports of these steps followed a series of gestures that Nicaraguan leaders have made recently toward their domestic critics and foreign adversaries. The Nicaraguan Government has been urged by several friendly countries to take such steps, diplomats said. 'We Are Giving a Signal' ''We are giving a signal,'' a leader of the ruling Sandinista National Liberation Front said in an interview. In addition, there have been widespread reports in Managua that Cuban military advisers have begun to leave Nicaragua in recent days. Western diplomats said they believed these reports were true, and one Sandinista leader confirmed them. More than 1,000 Cuban civilian advisers are believed to have left Nicaragua in recent weeks. A spokesman for the military, Roberto Sanchez, said today that the Government had adopted ''a position of generosity, which is not to be considered a sign of weakness.'' He said friendly gestures toward opponents of the regime were ''steps in the progress of the revolution.'' According to officials familiar with the amnesty proposal, thousands of anti-Government rebels will be eligible to take advantage of it. Diplomats said they were unsure whether many fighters in the anti-Sandinista forces would accept an offer to return home without punishment. But they said they expected that many political prisoners would be freed. Independent human-rights advocates say they believe there are several hundred Nicaraguans in jail for anti- Government activities. Several have been recognized by Amnesty International as ''prisoners of conscience.'' Businessmen in Talks Businessmen who have fled the country may be invited to return as part of the amnesty, according to leaders of the Nicaraguan private sector who have been approached by Sandinista representatives to discuss the proposal. Discussions are under way on whether farms and factories confiscated from anti-Government businessmen would be returned to them under such an arrangement. Nicaraguan leaders believe many of the Miskito Indians, who have been alienated by the Sandinistas' efforts to alter their traditional way of life, are tired of the wretched conditions there and would like to return home, according to Government officials. Religious workers in Managua, the Nicaraguan capital, confirmed reports that the Government had asked several Protestant ministers who have worked with the Miskitos to visit Miskito communities in Honduras and ask what guarantees the Indians would need to return home. At a news conference Tuesday, Interior Minister Tomas Borge appeared to confirm that such a proposal was imminent.  ''Serious consideration is being given to some new measures we will soon establish with relation to the Miskitos,'' he said. In an interview last week, Mr. Borge attributed much of the friction between Miskitos and the Sandinista regime to ''stupid policies on our part.'' Sandinista Meets Bishops The Sandinistas made what was taken as a new gesture of conciliation toward the Roman Catholic hierarchy Tuesday. Daniel Ortega Saavedra, coordinator of the governing junta, received two visiting Venezuelan bishops, and several important Government officials attended a reception at the Venezuelan Embassy at which the Venezuelan bishops and their Nicaraguan counterparts were guests of honor. Members of local Sandinista Defense Committees, which exist in every part of the country to carry out tasks assigned by the Government and the National Liberation Front, said they had been told they will take an active part in the Purisima religious festival next Wednesday, building large altars and sponsoring public celebrations. ''The people are not interested in their leaders being atheists,'' said the official. ''La Purisima is part of the popular Nicaraguan tradition, with which we strongly identify.'' A special mass is tentatively planned for Wednesday in front of Government House, at which important dignitaries will take part, officials said. According to a high-ranking military officer, celebrations will also be held on military bases, and militia members will assist in the preparations in civilian neighborhoods where appropriate. The officer confirmed reports that Cuban military advisers had begun leaving Nicaragua.  ''We don't need them anymore,'' he said. ''They have taught us what they had to teach. It is not good for an army command to rely permanently on advisers.''"
