"President Reagan said today that he had killed legislation requiring that he report regularly on human rights conditions in El Salvador because the reports might actually invite rather than discourage death-squad violence there. ''If we have this thing of having to certify every few months to the Congress in order to get this aid,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''there are people, both on the left and right, who know that if they step up the violation of human rights - the murders and so forth so that we can't certify - they, from whichever side, are helping to win their battle against the democratic Government.'' The President, answering questions from a group of schoolchildren on C-Span, a cable television network, also said slayings attributed to right- wing factions in El Salvador might actually be carried out by leftist guerrillas who know ''the right wing will be blamed for it.'' ''Now, I'm not absolving the right wing,'' Mr. Reagan said, acknowledging that there were ''right-wing assassins and murder squads and so forth.'' On China and Taiwan Mr. Reagan also discussed the issue of China, saying, ''We have made it plain that in continuing and trying to build this relationship with the People's Republic of China on the mainland, we, in no way, retreat from our alliance and our friendship with the Chinese on Taiwan.'' He said American ties with Taiwan went back to World War II, adding, ''We are not going to throw aside one friend in order to make another.'' The President's views on El Salvador represented his strongest rejection so far of Congressional concern that right- wing violence was compromising the Administration's policy on that country. ''We're doing everything we can to control that,'' the President said. ''I didn't think this bill would help,'' he added. The measure, sent to Mr. Reagan by Congress, was killed Wednesday by pocket veto, which occurs after a bill remains unsigned for 10 legislative days while Congress is not in session. It would have required the President to continue to assure Congress every six months that El Salvador was making progress in reducing human rights abuses. Congressional critics such as Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, termed the pocket veto ''a powerful blow'' against justice and peace in El Salvador. But Mr. Reagan contended that the reporting deadlines, which would be tied to a continuation of American aid, might only tempt factions to increase their violence as a device designed to affect American policy and weaken support for the Salvadoran Government. Antidote to Death Squads Mr. Reagan, while admitting that there were ''heldovers'' from the ''privileged class'' ways of the past who support the murder squads, argued that the strongest antidote to death-squad violence was a central government able to withstand the challenge from leftist guerrillas. ''What I want is for Congress to give us the help that should be provided,'' he said. The President spoke as the White House announced that Vice President Bush would visit El Salvador on Dec. 11 to talk about all ''pertinent aspects'' of the Administration's policy, including the antiguerrilla effort and progress on rights. Mr. Reagan also voiced for the first time his suspicion that leftists might be committing violence in order to see rightists blamed. The statement came after a period of increasingly sharp denunciations by other Administration officials of right-wing violence. American officials had cautioned that the Salvadoran Government risked losing popular support as well as American aid unless right-wing violence were curbed. Letter From House Democrats A group of 37 House Democrats, meanwhile, called on the President to use American military aid to El Salvador as leverage to press the Government to halt right-wing violence. The lawmakers' letter signaled that the Administration might encounter strong resistance in the House if, as in years past, it seeks additional military aid for El Salvador beyond the $64.8 million for 1984 voted last month by Congress. Already, 30 percent of these funds have been withheld by Congress until the Salvadoran Government holds a trial in the case of four American Roman Catholic churchwomen slain in El Salvador in December 1980. Many members of Congress expect requests for additional aid next year after the Administration receives the recommendations of a Presidential commission on Central America. Describing the situation in El Salvador, the President said, ''The Congress, by holding down the help that we can give to this El Salvador Government, is simply leaving them in a position of, well, they can keep on fighting but they don't have the means to actually win yet.'' ''They're just dragging on,'' he said."
