"Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth W. Dam said today that right-wing terrorists in El Salvador and Guatemala were largely responsible for the successes of Marxism in the Caribbean region. ''The death squads and their backers in El Salvador and Guatemala are enemies of democracy every bit as much as the guerrillas and their Cuban and Soviet sponsors,'' Mr. Dam said in an address to the seventh annual conference on trade, investment and development in the Caribbean basin. In Washington, President Reagan said he had killed legislation requiring that he report regularly on human rights conditions in El Salvador because the reports might actually invite rather than discourage death-squad violence. (Page 6.) 'We Must Help' In his remarks to government and business leaders from Central America and the Caribbean, Mr. Dam said: ''Somoza's dictatorship in Nicaragua and the pre-1979 'Mongoose Gang' in Grenada helped pave the way for the Marxist-Leninists and their violence. If we are to contribute to stability and lasting peace, we must help leaders who will oppose violence and dictatorship, who will work for law and democracy.'' His reference was to Gen. Anastasio Somoza Debayle, the Nicaraguan leader who was ousted in 1979, and to the gang of gunmen used by Sir Eric Gairy to quash all opposition in Grenada. Sir Eric was later ousted in a coup that installed Maurice Bishop as Prime Minister. While in Miami, Mr. Dam met with 25 American ambassadors and deputy chiefs of missions in the Caribbean and other State Department officials who coordinate Caribbean policy. No details were given of their meeting, which was described by one official as ''somewhat more than routine.'' In recent weeks the Reagan Administration has repeatedly expressed serious concern over the killings and intimidation by right-wing terrorist groups and death squads in El Salvador. In Guatemala, a serious intensification of terrorist activities by both the right and the left has been reported. Western diplomats in Guatemala City have reported threats against embassy personnel, and church and political leaders say violence is increasing in the countryside. The United States, Mr. Dam said, rejects the ''counterfeit alternatives'' of both the right and the left and is trying to establish ''more decent, progressive, forward-looking societies.'' In the Caribbean, he said, the United States ''first must help insure that democracy works and is accompanied by genuine economic progress.'' ''Second, we must help Nicaragua,'' he went on. ''The Sandinistas must recognize the danger of dictatorship, intervention and militarization. Nicaragua must return to the original goals of the democratic revolution against the Somoza dictatorship.'' Mr. Dam urged the Caribbean private sector to play a more active role in the ideological struggle between the right and the left. He recognized that the area's trade, investment and development ''are in trouble.'' He said that after a generation of sustained progress ''1983 will be the second straight year of zero growth for the basin as a whole.'' He cited entrepreneurs of Costa Rica and Jamaica as being especially active ''despite heavy national burdens'' and said that even Salvadoran businessmen were busily rebuilding and planning. In Nicaragua, he said, ''the private sector is struggling to preserve its identity, its vocation and its ability to produce.'' In Grenada, he said, some of the middle-class youth who see ''injustice, poverty and despair'' are turning to violence. ''Some of them will inevitably be seduced by the false promises of Soviet-Cuban rhetoric,'' Mr. Dam said. Deaths in Salvador WASHINGTON, Dec. 2 (AP) - Two Salvadoran National Guardsmen who might have been able to link higher- ranking officers to the slaying of four American churchwomen were killed this year by ''military death squads,'' a former United States Ambassador to El Salvador asserted today. The envoy, Robert C. White, said he had been told by confidential sources that the men were victims of death squads but were officially listed as either missing or killed in action in El Salvador's four-year-old civil war. Mr. White, who was ambassador when the four women were killed three years ago, made his remarks upon arrival in Cleveland, where he was to receive an award named after one of the victims, Dorothy Kazel, an Ursuline nun. Five Salvadoran national guardsmen have been charged with the slayings, but little progress has been made toward a trial. 'The Only Two Witnesses' In a statement released in Washington, Mr. White said the dead guardsmen ''were the only two witnesses whose testimony would have linked Higher Command to the deaths of the American churchwomen.'' He said the Reagan Administration should have questioned ''the transparent cover story that these men fell in action.'' At a news conference in Cleveland, Mr. White said he believed the deaths of the two guardsmen could mean that ''some decision has been made to try the enlisted men now in custody.'' ''In my view, to convict these men and say that it began and ended with them would be simply a device to satisfy U.S. public opinion and would not really serve the ends of justice,'' he said. ''I think what you are seeing is a cover-up of those responsible.'' Mr. White said the two guardsmen who were killed this year had waited at El Salvador's international airport for two of the women, Ita Ford and Maura Clarke of New York, on Dec. 2, 1980. When the two women, who were Maryknoll sisters, did not arrive on an early flight from Nicaragua, Mr. White said, one of the guardsmen, Margarito Perez Nieto, ''communicated by radio or telephone with someone in authority'' and was overheard to say, ''They did not arrive on that flight. Shall we wait for the next flight?'' Mr. White said the two guardsmen did wait, later reporting the arrival of Sisters Ford and Clarke on the next flight and the presence of Sister Kazel and a layworker, Jean Donovan, both of Cleveland, who had come to pick up the two nuns. The four women disappeared that night and their bullet-riddled bodies were found in a shallow grave near the airport two days later."
