"A high Defense Department official charged tonight that ''the death squads of the violent right'' in El Salvador are actually benefiting the leftist guerrillas and ''more must be done'' to restrain them. In a major policy statement, Fred C. Ikle, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, asserted that by assassinating and intimidating members of the democratic center in El Salvador ''the violent extremists'' on both left and right ''are in fact working together.'' ''Both must be defeated,'' he said. His speech, cleared by the White House, followed a new effort by the United States Embassy in San Salvador to single out important right-wing officials responsible for death squad activities. It was the most forceful statement by a senior Reagan Administration official on the issue. Back From Salvador Visit Mr. Ikle returned last week from a trip to El Salvador where American officials said he had sought to impress the Defense Minister and top army commanders of the need to curtail the right-wing death squads before their assassinations and intimidation of trade union leaders and moderate politicians discredited the Government. He spoke tonight to the World Affairs Council in Dallas, and the prepared text of his speech was made available here.  In it he urged Congress not to cut back aid to Central American countries. ''If we calibrate our support at a level so low that we are bound to be always short of success, we ask for defeat in the long run,'' he said. But the major departure in his speech was the strong attack on the right-wing death squads in El Salvador. The Administration has been increasingly concerned about the rise in assassinations and intimidation as the Constituent Assembly debates the land redistribution program. Groups Likened to Fascists At one point, Mr. Ikle compared the violent right wing in El Salvador to fascists in other countries who have historically helped Communist movements indirectly by opposing democratic governments. With members of Congress resisting large aid programs for El Salvador while human rights problems persist, Mr. Ikle asserted that the Administration was ''making a concerted effort on this issue.'' On visits to Central America this month, he said, ''my main purpose in El Salvador and Guatemala was to press for improvement in human rights.'' Earlier this month, the American Embassy in San Salvador was reported to have urged the Government to take action against a number of army and security officers who were said to be ''highly suspected'' of being involved in assassination squads. Salvadoran Officials Named Privately, embassy officials pointed out Maj. Jose Ricardo Pozo, head of intelligence for the treasury police; Lieut. Col. Aristides Alfonso Marquez, head of intelligence for the national police, and Hector Antonio Regalado, head of security for the Constituent Assembly and a close friend of Roberto d'Aubuisson, a former army major and right-wing political leader. High Administration officials said Mr. Ikle's speech was a deliberate attempt by the Administration to put public pressure on the Salvadoran military leadership and Government to take action against these and other officials, including two provincial army commanders, who have been linked to the death squads. The Ikle speech, officials said, was intended to lay out the political logic behind the Administration's new toughness on the issue. ''The Communist guerrillas in El Salvador, of course, benefit from the human rights violations that can be blamed on the violent right,'' Mr. Ikle said. ''I was not surprised, therefore, to learn in El Salvador last week that the death squads of the violent right and the death squads of the guerrillas fight not each other, but the democratic center and the Government that seeks to hold fair and open elections. ''This means that the violent extremists on both sides are in practice working together,'' he went on. ''It has happened before in this century that fascists act as tools and accomplices of totalitarian Communist forces. If we want to help democracy and human rights, both must be defeated.''"
