"President Reagan's decision to kill a bill that tied future military aid to El Salvador to an improvement in the country's human rights record has weakened the Salvadoran Government's resolve to confront the problem, according to Salvadoran politicians and political analysts here. The officials said Mr. Reagan's decision on Wednesday was only one of a number of mixed signals from the United States that have undercut the Reagan Administration's strong statements against right-wing terror here. ''Your Government never seems to have a clear policy,'' said one Salvadoran politician. ''Everyone here, the left and the extreme right, can read what they want to from the signals.'' The mixed signals have affected what happens in El Salvador, according to Western diplomats. Although American officials have said United States policy in El Salvador will fail if the death squads continue, the Government has yet to take satisfactory action, the diplomats said. A Belief That Aid Will Go On Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering said last Friday that future military aid to El Salvador would be at risk if the Government did not prosecute suspected death-squad members. Less than three days later Mr. Reagan used the pocket veto to kill the bill requiring the Salvadoran Government to show progress in human rights. Such unclear signals from Washington - strong oratory coupled with a refusal to tie aid to progress - has left many Salvadorans with the impression that military aid will continue despite the country's human rights record. One political leader said the total effect of all the signals from Washington had been to strengthen the far right. At the very least, he said, the reality of what has been done in El Salvador to control right-wing terror demonstrates an unwillingness by the Government to confront the problem head on. Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova, the Defense Minister, last week transferred five officials suspected of human rights abuses. One high-ranking Western diplomat called the transfers a ''60 percent Salvadoran solution,'' meaning that the solution was not what the situation called for but was better than nothing. Western officials had hoped that some of the officers would be expelled from the military or sent abroad to foreign consulates. Instead, the Defense Minister opted for what Western diplomats consider to be the least effective solution: All of the suspected officers were transferred within the country. General Vides Casanova, speaking today at a Defense Ministry ceremony where he honored two American officers, said the death squads ''must disappear forever'' and urged Salvadorans to help ''pursue and denounce them.'' Western diplomats said last month that the intelligence directors for two national security forces had been suspected of involvement in death-squad activity. Maj. Jose Ricardo Pozo, one of these suspects, was transferred from head of intelligence for the treasury police to the head of operations for the American-trained Atonal battalion based in the southern province of Usulutan. Lieut. Col. Aristides Alfonso Marquez, intelligence director for the national police, was made assistant director of the nation's military school, where future officers and leaders are trained. While the transfers removed these two men from critical intelligence positions, a high-ranking Western diplomat said that if their replacements came from within the same departments, the abuses would probably continue. Other Military Changes Made The provincial military commander in Sonsonate, where soldiers were implicated in the massacre of 18 farmers last February, was transferred to a desk job in the army's high command. Two other commanders accused of human rights abuses were moved to other regional command posts that place them closer to combat. At the same time as he made these changes, General Vides Casanova announced a general shake-up of his regional commanders and named Col. Aldolfo Blandon as his chief of staff. These changes appear to strengthen the conservative officer corps. While many of the regional commanders are considered hard-liners with respect to military matters, many are also said to be fed up with fellow officers who have been associated with the death squads. For its part, the Government has not taken any clear action against civilians suspected of death-squad activity. However, the national police announced today the arrest of four men and one woman said to be linked to the kidnapping of a businessman. Three of the men are employed as security officiers in the Constituent Assembly. The head of security for the Assembly has been identified by Western diplomats as the leader of the death-squad activity, but no action has been taken against him. On Tuesday Washington served notice of its disapproval of Roberto d'Aubuisson, the leader of the far-right who has been linked to death-squad activity, by denying him a visa to enter the United States. But, again, the signals from Washington were mixed. Two days after the visa was denied, Mr. d'Aubuisson met with Senator Jeremiah Denton, a Republican from Alabama, who was reported to have told Mr. d'Aubuisson that Communism ''like a cancer must be stopped.'' Mr. d'Aubuisson, visibly angry about his visa, said ''leftist journalists'' had acted against him as part of a ''campaign to discredit not only me but the process I am involved in.'' He also said he had been invited by members of Congress to visit Washington."
