"Repression cannot forever substitute for politics in a sophisticated society, especially not when times are tough. It's an old lesson for which Chile provides the newest blackboard - and yet, as the bloody disorders there demonstrate, it's a lesson the Chilean Government still doesn't understand. How long will it shut its ears to the clamor for change that now rises from all quarters? How much more innocent blood must be spilled to maintain its rule? Chile was nurtured on democracy for a century, but for the last decade it has lived with dictatorship. Its last democratic Government, led by the leftist Salvador Allende, came to power in 1970, ushering in a time of political and economic upheaval. Concern over Mr. Allende's radicalism drove opponents, including the Nixon Administration, to support a military coup. They got it, from Gen. Augusto Pinochet, who took power and seemed by contrast to embody order and prosperity. The cost in human rights violations - thousands executed or sent to concentration camps, tens of thousands tortured and driven into exile - was appalling. Still, the Pinochet regime won credit among many Chileans for finally damping down the left- right passions that had torn democracy apart. And its free-market policies seemed for a time to bolster the economy. Only three years ago, during a soaring economic boom, voters backed a new Constitution permitting the general to stay in office through 1989.  Free-market policies did not, however, eliminate Chile's dependence on copper exports and on world economic conditions; and suddenly General Pinochet's popularity has evaporated. He was always opposed by the left, which bore the brunt of his repression. Now, economic collapse has cost him the center and right as well. His regime's inability to accommodate peaceful protest threatens to alienate remaining centers of support, including the military high command.  Since spring, centrist Christian Democrats and unionists have led demonstrations to press for democratic rule. They have won support from Chileans of all classes, desperate for economic relief. Washington has added its voice, though not as loudly as it should, to the chorus of those deploring the renewed repression.  The Pinochet Government acts as if this were still 1973 and it need only face down the angry opposition of a discredited left. Then, repressive force eliminated the most radical elements. To respond in the same way to today's broad-based opposition risks an opposite effect, undermining the advocates of peaceful change and enhancing the appeal of more radical alternatives.  What a sour paradox: General Pinochet, failing to recognize changed circumstance and persisting stubbornly in repression, risks leaving Chile in much the state he found it 10 years ago."
