"A top Administration official said today that El Salvador's armed forces need more mobility to counter recent guerrilla attacks, but Congress has not appropriated enough money to provide this. The official, Fred C. Ikle, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, said of the Salvadoran armed forces that even ''with the $64.8 million appropriated for 1984, we can't do enough to improve their ability to respond quickly.'' Mr. Ikle returned Friday from a tour of Central American countries. He was accompanied by Elliott Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. The tour included talks with leaders of El Salvador and Guatemala in which reported violations of human rights in the two countries were discussed. ''I weighed in with Mr. Abrams on this subject,'' Mr. Ikle said. ''There are different problems in the two countries and different abuses, which we raised with those leaders.'' Concern Over Death Squads The State Department, in particular, has been increasingly concerned about the recent activities of right-wing death squads in El Salvador. These activities include attacks on the country's highest church officials as well as on labor union leaders. The attacks have been stepped up, according to officials at the United States Embassy, as United States has increased pressure for the Salvador Government to carry out land redistribution programs. The United States Embassy, in the past two weeks, has also been pressing the Salvadoran Government to take action against a number of army and security officers who are suspected of involvement in the death squads, officials at the embassy have said. On the subject of the Salvadoran Government's efforts against Salvadoran guerrillas, Mr. Ikle said: ''We came away with the impression that in El Salvador particularly, the Government needs much more mobility, both in providing reinforcements when guerrillas attack and in evacuating the wounded from those attacks.'' On Friday, Congress approved spending $64.8 million for aid to El Salvador in fiscal 1984, which began Oct. 1, but stipulated that 30 percent of the money could not be used until verdicts are returned in cases involving the killing of four United States churchwomen in that country. President Reagan had requested $86.3 million for El Salvador. Aid Request Cut by Congress Last year Congress cut the Administration's requests for El Salvador aid by half and this year by 25 percent. ''We are concerned both about the spond to renewed guerrilla attacks and its efforts to evacuate wounded soldiers and civilians,'' Mr. Ikle said. ''Not much can be done to improve the capacity of Government forces to respond quickly unless we provide more helicopters and light aircraft,'' he added. Many improvements in medical evacuation and care had been made with the help of United States advisers, Mr. Ikle said.  ''But more equipment is needed, especially to prolong life,'' he said. ''The fatality ratio is much higher than need be.'' Mr. Ikle said the amount of money appropriated was not enough to provide new helicopters. ''We are too limited in what we can do to help,'' he said.  Mr. Ikle also noted that the United States was sending military engineers to Costa Rica to perform such work as road construction in a special exercise.  These engineers, which could number as many as 1,000, would raise United States military personnel in Central America to nearly 5,000 including the almost 4,000 already in Honduras for a six-month-long exercise, he said. United States military personnel would then be on either side of Nicaragua, but Mr. Ikle stressed that the engineers going to Costa Rica were not combat troops but soldiers with civil duties."
