"Argentina's military Government approved a law today granting the military and the police immunity from prosecution for crimes committed during the so-called dirty war against leftists. More than 6,000 people were reported to have disappeared while in the custody of security forces in the antiterrorist campaign. Hundreds more were killed and thousands tortured. The law, which takes effect immediately, also gives immunity to people suspected of terrorist activity, but not to those already convicted or in exile. Related Antiterrorist Law In a related development tonight, the Government's legislative advisory commission sent the text of another proposed antiterrorist law to President Reynaldo Bignone for action. The text was not released, but human rights lawyers said it appeared to represent an attempt by the military to retain independent powers to fight terrorism under a democratic government. The amnesty legislation, officially known as the Law of National Pacification, comes five weeks before national elections intended to return the country to civilian government. Politicians and human rights groups reacted vigorously to the amnesty measure, calling it illegal and immoral. Confrontation Possible Almost all the major candidates in the elections set for Oct. 30 have said they will seek to annul the amnesty once a new Congress is seated, setting up a possibly explosive confrontation between the military and civilian leaders. Italo Luder, the presidential candidate of the Peronist party, the country's largest party, said the law ''will be repudiated by all the Argentine public.'' Francisco Manrique, candidate for the conservative Federal Alliance, said the law gave ''unmerited liberty for those who were protagonists of violence and death.'' Harsh Statements Drafted Major human rights groups, like the Center for Legal and Social Studies, the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights and the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, were all drafting strongly critical statements, their leaders said. Hebe de Bonafini, president of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, a group that represents many of the families of those who disappeared, said in an interview, ''Without justice and punishment, peace will not be possible.'' She said the human rights groups would lead street demonstrations and fight the law in the courts and the future Congress until the individual fates of the ''disappeared'' were uncovered and military leaders punished. The military has repeatedly said that those who disappeared should be considered dead. In a statement accompanying the law, the Government implicitly admitted human rights abuses. ''It must be remembered here that the armed forces fought for the dignity of man,'' the statement said. ''However, the cruel and treacherous way in which terrorist subversion established the terms of battle might have given rise to actions in the course of combat that were incompatible with this aim.'' The Government said it was decreeing the amnesty as a ''parting point'' with the past and to begin rebuilding ''national reconciliation and overcoming past tragedies.'' The military seized power in 1976, overthrowing President Isabel Martinez de Peron, but the law forgives acts committed after May 25, 1973. That was when the newly elected Peronist Government of President Hector Campora issued an amnesty after an earlier period of military rule. The period covered by the amnesty ends June 17, 1982, the day the junta headed by President Leopoldo Galtieri was dissolved after Argentina's defeat by Britain in the war over the Falkland Islands. The terrorist fighting and disappearances had largely ended two years earlier. Human rights leaders estimate that fewer than a dozen suspected terrorists still face charges. About 250 people convicted of terrorist crimes by military and civilian courts are in jail and would not be affected by the amnesty. Nor would the unknown number of suspected terrorists in exile. Left unresolved by the law was the status of an estimated 160 suspected terrorists in jail by administrative fiat, most of them for more than seven years. The military had said those 160 people would be freed before a new Government took over. But for the Goverment forces and the few suspected terrorists who do benefit by the amnesty, the law is sweeping in content. ''No one will be interrogated, investigated, summoned to appear or required to do anything for charges or suspicions'' related to the terror and counterterror, the law said. It said this ''includes related common crimes and related military crimes.'' Lawyers here said the wording was so broad it appeared to protect military personnel and policemen from being prosecuted for such common crimes as stealing from the homes of those who disappeared or raping suspects during antiterrorist operations. The lawyers said it also appeared to protect suspected terrorists from being prosecuted for kidnappings, murders and robberies that often seemed to be as much criminal as political."
