"President-elect Raul Alfonsin named an eight-member Cabinet Tuesday night that includes the installation of personal confidants in key ministries. The new Government will take office on Dec. 10, leading Argentina back to democracy after nearly eight years of military rule. The new ministers are all members of Mr. Alfonsin's Reformist Radical Party. Some are veterans of the party establishment while others were virtually unknown until a few weeks ago. The newcomers are Foreign Minister Dante Caputo and Labor Minister Antonio Mucci, both figures on the left wing of the broad-based Radical Party. Mr. Caputo, 39 years old, is the youngest member of Mr. Alfonsin's Cabinet and his appointment is the main surprise. Sorbonne and Harvard Educated in sociology and political science at the Sorbonne and Harvard University, he is an academic with little experience in diplomacy. His French-born wife, Anne Maurerl, monitors human rights in Argentina as an employee of the French Consulate. Mr. Caputo organized Mr. Alfonsin's election campaign and is considered to be one of his closest advisers. Radical Party sources said the Foreign Ministry under Mr. Caputo would be split into two secretariats run by career diplomats closely linked to the Radical Party. Hugo Gobbi, at present the United Nations special representative in Cyprus, will head a ''security secretariat,'' dealing with priority issues such as the Falkland Island dispute with Britain, the Beagle Channel dispute with Chile and other affairs where a danger of conflict is involved, the sources said. Other foreign affairs issues, they added, will be handled by a secretariat under Elsa Kelly, the only woman so far appointed to Mr. Alfonsin's team. Three Veterans Picked The new Economy Minister will be Bernardo Grinspun, 58, a neo-Keynsian. He is one of three members of the new Cabinet who served in the previous Radical Party administration, under Arturo Illia, between 1963 and 1966. The other two veterans are Roque Carranza, the Public Works Minister, and Carlos Alconada Aramburu, who takes over education and justice for the third time in his career. Mr. Grinspun, who was trade secretary under Mr. Illia, has pledged to reactivate industry by restricting the import of goods that can be produced locally and using state control of bank credit to increase productive investment. Another of Mr. Alfonsin's close advisers to join the Cabinet is Raul Borras, a journalist and businessman who becomes Minister of Defense. Purge of Military Ranks Mr. Borras, 50, will be charged with putting the armed forces firmly under civilian control and with purging the ranks of those responsible for human rights abuses during the campaign against leftist guerrillas in the 1970's. He will also have to carry out Mr. Alfonsin's campaign promise to slash military spending, while at the same time improving miitary training and combat efficiency on the basis of lessons learned in the Falkland conflict. Antonio Troccoli, a political economist and respected Radical Party Member of Parliament, is the new Interior Minister. He promised in an interview published today to transform the interior ministry into ''an instrument for freedom,'' reforming the police and the deeply feared state intelligence services."
