"The former head of Argentina's State Intelligence Agency was indicted today for ''illicit association'' with a right-wing terrorist group that has been blamed for a many assassinations and disappearances in the 1970's. The former intelligence chief, Gen. Otto Paladino, retired, was indicted and put under ''preventive imprisonment'' by a Federal Judge, Jose Nicasio Dibur. Under Argentine law, this means the general will be held without bail. The judge also indicted and put under preventive imprisonment two other people suspected of being members of the terrorist group: Lieut. Col. Rodolfo Schilici Moreno, a retired air force officer, and Ruben Dario Gonzalez Figueredos, a civilian. They are charged with illegally possessing ''arms and explosives of war,'' meaning such military weapons as grenades and machine guns. Series of Arrests The three indictments were the latest and most dramatic in a series of arrests in the last two months that have been raising the curtain on links between military sectors and a mysterious right-wing terrorist group, the Argentine Anticommunist Alliance, more commonly known as Triple A.  There was no immediate response to the indictments from the military, which is scheduled to turn power over to the democratically elected Government of President-elect Raul Alfonsin in less than a month. The military is known to fear prosecutions of officers for the more than 6,000 Argentines who disappeared in a campaign against leftists in the 1970's. But the military is divided and unpopular, and political and human rights leaders say they discount the possibility of a coup to stop such court investigations. 'An Important Step' Human rights leaders reached in Buenos Aires said they were gratified by the court decision. ''This is an important step in casting light on all that has happened,'' said Jose Westerkamp, a director of the Center for Legal and Social Studies, a leading human rights group. The human rights leaders said, however, that the bulk of the disappearances had been carried out by military and police undercover units in the line of duty, prosecution of which is considered more provocative to the military. The military has decreed an amnesty for itself for any crimes committed by troops or police under orders in the antisubversion fight. But Mr. Alfonsin has vowed to annul the measure, and many judges have already rejected it as unconstitutional. Human rights lawyers agree, however, that the Supreme Court will have to decide the issue, and no military man has yet to be prosecuted for a human rights abuse that was clearly in the line of duty. 'Bait Fish,' Politician Says ''Any move by the courts is postive,'' said Conte McDonnell, a Christian Democrat who has called for parliamentary investigations into the disappeared. ''But this is just a throwing out of bait fish so that no one will worry themselves with the sharks.'' Mr. McDonnell has demanded the prosecution of all the senior commanders since the military took power in a 1976 coup. General Paladino, chairman of a private detective agency since retiring as head of the State Intelligence Service in 1976, was taken in a military car this afternoon from the courthouse in Buenos Aires to a military prison in Magdalena, 70 miles away. Senior officers have the privilege of being held in military jails under the ruling military Government. Judge Dibur declined to release details of the indictment, citing the secrecy of his investigation. Though appointed by the military and generally considered sympathetic to the it, the judge has been pushing the Triple A investigation. He said recently that military men guilty of illegal association with terrorist groups were not subject to the amnesty, adding that the crimes of Triple A ''could not conceivably affect military institutions, which are based on the maintainence of discipline.'' Disaffected Military Men The Triple A case was brought by Guillermo Patricio Kelly, who has close ties to disaffected military men. He said in an interview that the military men provided much of his information. Mr. Kelly was kidnapped for two days in August. He charged that General Paladino and Triple A were responsible. He named four of his abductors, who are wanted by the police but have gone into hiding. Some 10 others who he said were members of Triple A have been arrested after raids ordered by Judge Dibur and other judges. Triple A was founded in 1973 under an elected Peronist Government by a Social Welfare Minister, Jose Lopez Rega, to combat growing leftist terrorism at the time. Its members were mostly retired military and police officers."
