"As part of an effort to press the Salvadoran Army to discipline officers suspected of involvement in rightist assassination squads, United States diplomats here have warned the Government that further resistance could result in substantial aid cutbacks. It was unclear if the United States Embassy's efforts would be effective. In the last three years no army officers have been disciplined for human rights abuses. Discussing human rights abuse last week, Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering said that the Government ''will have to deal with it directly if they expect to continue to get the sort of support that the Administration and many members of Congress would like to give.'' Mr. Pickering added that ''in some cases misplaced ideology on the right and perhaps misplaced loyalty among members or ex-members of security forces prevent anything from being done about their activities.'' Reluctance to Discipline While Mr. Pickering attributed to fear the Government's reluctance to discipline officers, other diplomats have suggested that the Reagan Administration could be blamed for not making enough demands on the Salvadoran Government.  A high-ranking embassy official said the United States could ''get more effective aid leverage'' by being more specific about what ''kinds of expectations we have and they have.'' The death squads, which embassy officials say are made up of both active and former army and security officers who are loyal to the far right, have been responsible for many of the thousands of civilian deaths in the last three years. On Friday embassy officials said that participants in these squads were believed to include the head of security for the country's Constituent Assembly, two intelligence directors from security forces and some army commanders. Western diplomats said the Reagan Administration had been reluctant to face the death-squad issue because the Administration was seeking to portray El Salvador as a country on the road to democracy. More Pressure From U.S. These Western diplomats said they were concerned that if the problem persists it could prevent any centrist Government that might win next year's presidential elections from surviving. United States Embassy officials say they have stepped up efforts to press the Government to prosecute suspects in the army, but it is not clear how far the Reagan Administration is willing to go in supporting those efforts. When the former Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton, made a strong public speech against right-wing violence last year, the Reagan Administration undercut the strength of the attack by saying Mr. Hinton's speech had not been cleared by the White House.In El Salvador, that could have been interpreted by the far right as a signal that the assassinations were acceptable behavior, said a Salvadoran political analyst. Mr. Pickering said the tactics of death squads did not reflect the ''general direction'' of the military high command. ''My sense is that there are a number of people in the Government and in the military who want to take action on these issues and that they are facing a very, very tough problem at the current time,'' he said. Committee Appointed A high-ranking United States Embassy official said Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova, the Defense Minister, had appointed a committee to investigate the military situation. The members of the committee, he said, ''are at least the source of some discontent and some feelings that the military has to be restructured.'' ''Some of those feelings we share as we don't think the leadership has been exemplary in all areas,'' the high-ranking United States Embassy official added."
