"Thousands of Chileans gathered near the center of Santiago this evening in what was described as one of the largest and most militant anti-Government protests in 10 years of military rule. The police kept their distance from the demonstrators, who were estimated to number more than 40,000 by the normally reliable Cooperativa radio network, which is considered the country's principal radio news outlet. But violence broke out when some columns marching toward the rally from outlying areas were halted by the police. The police fired warning shots into the air and used tear gas and water cannon to disperse marchers. Several demonstrators were injured and others were taken into custody. In Valparaiso, 60 miles west of here, five youths were reported injured and 10 others arrested when the police broke up a protest by university students. Other Protesters Gather The Government had given a permit for the rally here only 24 hours earlier, and many of those present said they were surprised that such a large crowd had gathered. It was the largest protest rally in Santiago since the monthly demonstrations against the Government began in May, many participants and several Chilean journalists said. Large groups of anti-Government protesters have also gathered in shantytown areas that surround Santiago for the funerals of some of those killed in clashes with the police in earlier demonstrations. The turnout in Santiago was considered especially large because the Democratic Alliance, a coalition of centrist political parties instrumental in planning past protests, declined to endorse the rally. Instead, it was organized in one day by the National Development Project, which is composed of left-leaning political, social and human rights groups. One of the organizers of the protest, Jorge Lavandero, a former Senate president, said the size of the crowd showed Chile's desire ''to tell the dictatorship that 10 years of persecution and misery are enough.'' General Augusto Pinochet seized power in a military coup in 1973, overthrowing Salvador Allende Gossens, a Marxist whose portrait was held aloft by many of today's protesters and whose name was repeatedly chanted by the crowd. Mr. Lavandero said Chile would soon emerge from ''this long night of anguish and pain'' and accused the Government of ''atrocious and unjust repression.'' In the midst of his speech, a wild cheer went up as Rodolfo Seguel, a popular 30-year-old labor leader who has been jailed twice this year, arrived on the platform. The crowd chanted, ''Seguel, the people are with you!'' Government Terror Charged Another speaker was Fabiola Letelier, a lawyer and human rights activist whose brother Orlando, who served as Foreign Minister in the Allende Government, was killed in Washington by agents of the Chilean Government. She accused the Goverment of imposing ''terror against the people'' and ''selling out the country to foreign capitalists.'' She specifically attacked the International Monetary Fund, which has advised Chile to impose austerity measures. ''While people slowly die of hunger,'' Miss Letelier told the animated crowd, ''new credits from abroad are used almost entirely to repay debts incurred by powerful economic and financial groups.'' Although many of those in the crowd said they were members of the Communist and Socialist parties, many others carried signs identifying themselves as Christian Democrats or members of other moderate parties belonging to the Democratic Alliance. The two Christian Democratic leaders who played important roles in last month's protest, Andres Zaldivar and Gabriel Valdes, were out of the country this week. The current president of the Democratic Alliance, Hugo Zepeda, said Monday night that ''the alliance has not called any protest and is not part of one.''"
