"In a rundown movie theater last weekend, 90 members of the Democratic Conservative Party gathered for the first opposition political convention held in Nicaragua since the Sandinista National Liberation Front swept into power four years ago. The delegates, all from Managua, were choosing the men and women who will represent the city at the party's national convention, scheduled for November. But they also found time to approve resolutions demanding freedom for political prisoners, an end to ''brutal censorship'' of the press and a halt to the ''antireligious campaign'' they said the Sandinista regime was waging. In a clear reference to the Sandinistas, the Democratic Conservatives pledged to do whatever possible to prevent the consolidation of ''totalitarian Marxist-Leninist regimes which are in the Soviet orbit and are rejected by the immense majority of our people.'' No Policemen in Sight Outside the theater, all was quiet. There was no sign of the Sandinista mobs that have broken up political meetings in the past. Not a single policeman was visible. As Nicaragua moves toward the introduction of a new law governing political parties and toward national elections, which the Sandinistas have promised for 1985, opposition political parties are testing the limits of their freedom. That the weekend convention was held without incident was considered an encouraging sign. So was the fact that the Social Christian Party was able to hold a meeting of 200 activists last Wednesday in Chinandega, 75 miles north of the capital. Under provisions of the ''state of emergency'' that the Sandinistas imposed in March 1982, most civil liberties, including freedoms of speech and assembly, are restricted. But over the last few weeks, opposition leaders said, there has been a noticeable thaw in the political climate. 35 Activists in Jail ''The meetings that are going on these days would never have been permitted three months ago,'' Adan Fletes, head of the Social Christian Party, said. ''But we remember the years of dictatorship, when there were periods of looseness interspersed with repression. Perhaps that same cycle still exists. We shall see.'' Although politicians appear to have been given some room to maneuver, 35 activists from the Democratic Conservative and Social Christian Parties are in jail. Some have been accused of counterrevolutionary activity, but others have not been charged with any crime. Several have been recognized as ''prisoners of conscience'' by Amnesty International. Two weeks ago the Sandinista-controlled Council of State, which reviews laws proposed by the governing junta, passed a Political Party Act after six months of vigorous debate. Opposition members of the Council were able to win revisions that they said make the law much less restrictive than the one originally proposed by the Sandinistas.  Under the new law, which needs the final approval of the junta to take effect, political parties are guaranteed the right to hold private meetings and public rallies, maintain offices anywhere in the country, raise funds and distribute literature. They may also criticize the Government and propose ''constructive solutions'' to national problems. Election Issue Unresolved Most important in the view of the opposition, parties have the right ''to aspire to power.'' Their platforms cannot be restricted as long as they respect ''the basic principles of the Sandinista revolution.'' Still unresolved, however, is the crucial question of what kind of elections the Sandinistas will permit. The options range from full-scale presidential and congressional elections to the indirect selection of a consultative assembly that would help write a new constitution, which could take years. Sandinista leaders have given few hints of their plans. In a recent speech, Sergio Ramirez Mercado, a junta member, asserted that Nicaraguans would not be asked to select a candidate ''as if they were choosing a brand of soap or deodorant.'' Instead, he said, they should expect an electoral system ''not manipulated by public relations agents'' so that they could vote ''to improve the country, not to favor multinational financial interests or military-industrial trusts.'' Some diplomats and Nicaraguans believe that the Sandinistas have not yet decided how to deal with the question of elections. In interviews this week, independent political analysts said a presidential election might pose a problem because it would require the nine Sandinista leaders to select a single individual to lead their party. The two most prominent Sandinistas, Daniel Ortega Saavedra, the junta coordinator, and Interior Minister Tomas Borge, are already engaged in subtle one-upmanship that some observers interpret as pre-election maneuvering. Opposition Is Divided The opposition, however, is even more ridden with conflicts. ''They can't get together on anything,'' a Western diplomat said. ''They are very divided and disorganized, and the parties are constantly bickering among themselves.''"
