"American Embassy officials, concerned over the Government's lagging battle against leftist guerrillas, are also increasingly worried about the shadowy war launched by right-wing terrorists against democratic institutions. Embassy officials said last week they had been unsuccessfully pressing the Government to remove army and security officers ''highly suspected'' of involvement with right- wing death squads. Those said to be involved included the head of security for the Constituent Assembly, two provincial army commanders and the directors of intelligence for two of the country's security forces, the National Police and the Treasury Police. This is severely embarrassing for Washington, which supports the army and provides more than 50 American military advisers. Embassy officials are worried that Congress may be reluctant to permit American soldiers to work with an institution held responsible for many of the estimated 1,300 civilian deaths this year. The paramilitary groups have grown more brazen. Last week, the Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Anti-Communist Brigade threatened Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas, and Msgr. Gregorio Rosa Chavez, the country's highest church officials, who have strongly attacked the paramilitary squads. (The former Archbishop, Oscar Arnulfo Romero, was assassinated in 1980 as he was saying mass.) The squads have been taking credit for their acts in the name of ''democracy,'' leaving hit lists of ''enemies of the people'' beside victims' bodies. A new F.M. radio station broadcasts daily attacks against labor unions and professors. Government officials and other Salvadorans said the surge of intimidation was triggered by debate on land redistribution in the Constituent Assembly, which is writing a new Constitution. It is a replay of the age-old battle between the ruling oligarchy and landless peasants. The far- right National Republican Alliance has called for freedom for property owners to transfer their land with restrictions on land owned by campesinos, or peasants. The alliance also wants to do away with plans to transfer cash crop farming to the campesinos. ''They are using all the methods they have,'' said Guillermo Antonio Guevara Lacayo, a Christian Democrat, ''from flattery to money to death threats.'' Security in the Assembly Threats against deputies who favor land redistribution have moved from the street to the assembly floor. As Richard Gonzalez Camacho was speaking in favor of land redistribution, a colleague's telephone rang. The caller warned that if Mr. Camacho did not stop talking, a bomb would be placed in his house. Mr. Camacho continued his speech, then left under armed guard. Since the telephone operators were off duty at the time, the call was probably placed from inside the assembly building, where security is directed by Hector Antonio Regalado, a close friend of Roberto d'Aubuisson, the assembly's right-wing president. Mr. Regalado, according to well- placed sources familiar with the assassination squads, is ''the head of the thing.'' To the dismay of American officials, the institutions and practices they have held up as examples of progress toward democracy are now being attacked as communist by some Government officials. Mr. d'Aubuission accused a United States-backed labor union of pressuring the assembly. The union was using ordinary democratic methods - peaceful rallies, paid advertisements and private lobbying. ''Some people here confuse a socialist project with Marxist- Leninist ideologies,'' said Luis Nelson Segovia who heads the centrist Democratic Action Party. Strong protests against recent right-wing violence by the American Embassy, the State Department and the White House have had little effect. Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering said in an interview that ''misplaced ideology on the right and perhaps misplaced loyalty among members or ex-members of security forces prevent anything from being done.'' Some Government and military officials want to act against the death squads but have been blocked, he added. Other diplomats said the Reagan Administration has been recluctant to face the death squad issue publicly because it goes counter to the American effort to portray El Salvador as a country on the road to democracy. Ambassador Pickering learned the limits of embassy influence when he called in Mr. d'Aubuisson to express disapproval of his threats against a labor organizer. A few days later, Mr. d'Aubuisson repeated the threats over nationwide television. While United States officials have tried to get the violence curbed, the Salvadoran Government has remained virtually silent. The Foreign Ministry's third highest official was kidnapped, by terrorists, but his colleagues have yet to issue a public reproach. While the Government had no trouble detecting and closing a leftist radio operation in the capital, it has not acted against the far-right radio station. United States diplomats had hoped Congressional refusal to approve the Reagan Administration's full aid request for El Salvador would alert the Government to the necessity of change. But despite the promise by the provisional President, Alvaro Magana, that the National Guardsmen responsible for the murder of four American churchwomen would be prosecuted in August, after nearly three years the case is still stuck in the courts. An army officer who was been implicated in the murder of two American labor advisers is free and can be seen driving around the capital in a red Mustang."
