"''Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied.'' Adolfo Perez Esquivel undoubtedly is wellacquainted with that beatitude, since he has literally thirsted after righteousness. Last week, Mr. Perez Esquivel received a measure of recognition, if not satisfaction, when he was named winner of the 1980 Nobel Peace Prize. Mr. Perez Esquivel, an Argentine who is a sculptor and a former university professor of architecture, helped organize and now leads Service for Peace and Justice in Latin America, a human rights organization. His selection was a strong rebuke to Argentina's military junta, which has been the target of many of his group's efforts and at whose hands he personally has suffered. The junta said that Mr. Perez Esquivel's selection ''has taken the country by surprise.'' And it attempted an ex post facto justification of his jailing for a year without charge by saying that his actions ''were effectively used to make the moves of members of various terrorist organizations easier.'' Mr. Perez Esquivel, speaking to reporters in his organization's shabby offices in Buenos Aires after the announcement by the Norwegian Nobel Committee in Oslo, said, ''I accept this prize in the name of Latin America and its workers, in the name of its campesinos and its priests who are working diligently for the peace and rights of all.'' He also denied any involvement with terrorists or guerrillas, saying he condemned all violence. The Nobel committee said Mr. Perez Esquivel had ''shone a light in the darkness'' of repression throughout Latin America and especially in Argentina, where the junta, after seizing power in a 1976 coup, made terror a regular instrument of government. The repression reportedly has eased within the last year, but before that an estimated 10,000 to 20,000 persons had disappeared after being detained by state security forces. Mr. Perez Esquivel, whose nonviolent human rights activity predated the junta, was quoted in an interview last year as saying he was tortured during his imprisonment by, among other things, being deprived of water for a week."
