"Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the United States had a moral obligation not to allow concerns over human rights violations in El Salvador to lead to abandonment of that nation to ''a brutal military takeover by a totalitarian minority.'' In a wide-ranging defense of the Administration's policy in Central America, Mr. Shultz said it was crucial that Congress restore the military aid it had cut for El Salvador and thus create a ''shield'' behind which free elections and economic development can occur. 'Depends on the Congress' ''Whether we will be able to help provide this shield in time depends on the Congress,'' Mr. Shultz said in a speech in Dallas to that city's World Affairs Council and Chamber of Commerce. ''In the middle of a war, the Congress has cut security assistance by twothirds below the previous fiscal year. Here you are in the army and you're fighting, and all of a sudden the flow you need is cut by twothirds and people ask, how come the army isn't doing so well.'' Congress cut military aid to El Salvador for the current fiscal year to $26.3 million, from $82 million the previous year. The Administration has asked for an additional $60 million to be transferred to El Salvador from other countries' aid and a supplemental $50 million in another bill. The requests have run into opposition on Capitol Hill. As part of a stepped-up Administration effort to win public backing for the aid to El Salvador, Mr. Shultz hammered away at the dual themes that Nicaragua is rapidly becoming part of the Soviet and Cuban camp and that protecting El Salvador from a similar fate is in American strategic and moral interests. He did not refer to the dispute over covert United States aid to anti-Government forces in Nicaragua. Mr. Shultz said not only that there were 2,000 Cuban military and security advisers in Nicaragua but also that Nicaragua's Defense Minister said in an interview last week that Nicaragua would consider accepting Soviet missiles if asked to do so by Moscow. Speculation on Missiles There has been no indication, however, that the Soviet Union intends to place any missiles in Nicaragua, State Department officials said. The Soviet Union has warned that if the United States places medium-range missiles in Europe close to the Soviet border, it might take analagous steps. But Soviet officials have said they will not violate the 1962 accord with the United States barring nuclear missiles from Cuba. This has led to speculation that Moscow might be thinking of Nicaragua. Humberto Ortega Saavedra, the Nicaraguan Defense Minister, said his Government would ''examine the proposal'' if it were made ''and make our own decision.'' Some members of Congress have asserted that covert funds are being used to overthrow the Government of Nicaragua, would be illegal. But Mr. Reagan, without acknowleding the use of covert funds, said Thursday that the United States was only trying to block the flow of clandestine aid from Nicaragua to rebels in El Salvador and that the United States action was legal. Congressman Sees Nothing Wrong On Thursday night, Representative Robert H. Michel, the Republican leader, said he saw nothing wrong with helping anti-Sandinist rebels who are ''more compatible with our way of life.'' ''We know who's supporting the Sandinists,'' he said, ''and nobody's done'' anything about it.  As part of the effort to track down the flow of arms to and from Nicaragua, Pentagon officials said Awacs surveillance planes had been used over the Caribbean for the past two months. ''What is happening in Central America could endanger our own security and that of our friends throughout the Caribbean Basin, from Mexico to the Panama Canal,'' Mr. Shultz said, citing the strategic need to back El Salvador. ''But an equal reason is moral,'' he said. ''How can we, in the name of human rights, abandon our neighbors to a brutal military takeover by a totalitarian minority? If our concern is freedom, will a Communist victory provide it? If our concern is judicial fairness, will a Communist regime provide it? If our concern is poverty, will a Communist economic system provide prosperity?'' 'Difficult Choices' Mr. Shultz said, ''The American people and their elected representatives have difficult choices to make.  ''It is easy to play the demagogue, and it is tempting to avoid hard decisions,'' he continued. ''But if we walk away from this challenge, we will have let down not only all those in Central America who yearn for democracy, but we will have let ourselves down. We cannot be for freedom and human rights only in the abstract. If our ideals are to have meaning, we must defend them when they are threatened.'' Criticism of El Salvador in Congress has centered on what the critics say is the poor record of the Salvadoran authorities in prosecuting murderers and other criminals, including those who killed four American women missionaries in 1980. Critics on Capitol Hill have also urged that the Administration put pressure on the authorities to negotiate with the rebels. 'Must Do Much Better' Mr. Shultz, whose speech was broadcast by closed circuit to the State Department, said the Salvadorans ''must do much better'' in dealing with the ''deeply troubling problem'' of its ''ineffective system of criminal justice.'' He said Attorney General William French Smith was now in El Salvador with a team of experts to study ways of improving the criminal justice system. As to negotiations, he repeated that the United States supported negotiations by all parties that would expand participation in the elections to be held later this year. But he said, ''We will not support negotiations that short-circuit the very democratic process El Salvador is trying to establish. We will not carve up power behind the people's backs as happened in Nicaragua.'' Says Pledges Were Betrayed In discussing Nicaragua, he said that the Sandinists came to power in 1979 promising free elections, political pluralism and nonalignment, but that ''today every one of these promises is being betrayed.'' He said El Salvador became ''the first target'' of the Nicaraguans, now aligned with the Soviet Union and Cuba.  ''The Communist intervention has not brought the guerrillas to power in El Salvador,'' he said, ''but it has cost thousands of lives and widened an already bitter conflict. Today, El Salvador hangs in the balance, with reforming democrats pitted against the forces of old and new dictatorship alike.'' The ''old'' dictatorship, he said, was a variety of ''economic oligarchy, political despotism and military repression,'' which he said was ''the traditional method of social organization for most of Central America's history.'' He said the ''new'' dictatorship was that of ''a command economy, a self-appointed elitist vanguard and guerrilla war.'' ''Nicaragua has become its base,'' he said, ''all of Central America its target.''"
