"The Vatican, with unusual force, today criticized the Argentine military Government's statement last week that the thousands of people still missing after its campaign in the 1970's against leftist terrorists must now be considered dead. At the same time, President Sandro Pertini of Italy resumed his attacks on the Argentine leadership.  The Vatican made its view public in a prominently displayed, unsigned statement on the front page of today's issue of the Vatican daily L'Osservatore Romano. The publication of what amounts to a formal protest underlines the gravity of the view Pope John Paul II takes of the Argentine Government's efforts to put behind it the most serious human rights violations committed on its behalf. 'More Anguishing Question' The Vatican article said Argentina's accounting of its campaign against leftists was not ''comprehensible or acceptable'' even for those who want to view it with the understanding that the Argentine junta requested. The Vatican said the Argentine explanation seemed to have opened ''new and - if possible -more anguishing questions.'' The article said, ''One cannot but express - with great sadness - the severe objections that spring from the public conscience and, at the same time, the human and Christian sharing of a grief that has thus become, if possible, even more bitter and disconsolate.'' The article said the Roman Catholic Church had shown sympathy as long as the Argentine Government continued to investigate the disappearances. ''Now has arrived,'' the Vatican article said, ''unexpectedly and definitively, the declaration that those who figure on the lists of the 'desaparecidos,' who are not living in exile or in hiding - but which and how many? - 'are considered dead in all juridical and administrative effect.' ''There is no more official possibility for a further effort of investigation into the truth,'' the Vatican article said. Message by Pertini The Vatican attack followed a message sent by Mr. Pertini to Buenos Aires last Saturday that criticized the Argentine Government. Mr.  Pertini's message reflected the fact that many of the missing are either Italian citizens or, like much of Argentina's population, of Italian origin. Buenos Aires responded with a strong protest, delivered by the Argentine Embassy to the Foreign Ministry in Rome and made public today. The note described Mr. Pertini's stand as ''an evident interference in the internal affairs of the Republic of Argentina.'' Reacting immediately, Mr. Pertini made public tonight a reply that he sent to President Reynaldo Bignone of Argentina that said in part, ''All humanity should consider itself wounded and offended.'' France Expresses Disapproval PARIS, May 3 (Reuters) - The French Government called in the Argentine charge d'affaires today to express strong disapproval of an official report on the disappearance of thousands of Argentines in the 1970's. The Foreign Ministry said France had registered its ''great surprise at a statement, which purports to exonerate from all responsibility the perpetrators of brutalities committed in the name of maintaining public order.''"
