"Raul Alfonsin, leader of the Radical Civil Union, whose stunning victory in Sunday's elections has restored democracy to Argentina, acknowledges an enormous debt of gratitude to the United States. He is gravely concerned - and rightly so - that President Reagan will fail to live up to the standards set by his predecessor in protecting Argentina's human rights. Mr. Alfonsin believes that Jimmy Carter's human rights policy saved thousands of lives in Argentina. It is even possible that he himself owes his life to the unsilent diplomacy of Mr. Carter's human rights team in the State Department during the three years after the Argentine military coup of March 1976 - years in which at least 6,000 people were abducted, routinely tortured and secretly murdered by the military. Mr. Alfonsin was one of the few political leaders to speak out during those dangerous years and was the only one to play an active role in a tiny human rights commission composed almost entirely of relatives of victims of the military's repression. Mr. Alfonsin will never forget the American Scarlet Pimpernels, like ''Tex'' Harris, the incredibly brave and hardworking human rights officer in the United States Embassy in Buenos Aires, whose office was a haven for relatives of disappeared people and whose secretary was a recording angel.  If American eyes, and, more important, the eyes of the United States Government had not been trained on Argentina in 1976 when the military adopted terrorist techniques to fight terrorism, there is no knowing when the slaughter would have stopped. When the armed forces commanders decided to unleash their own terrorist groups, they apparently relinquished all control over them. It is still unclear whether the paradoxically named Security Forces were required to account for their actions, whether there were simulacrums of trials and whether anyone was held responsible for acknowledged ''excesses.'' The euphemism ''excesses'' was applied to the murder of known innocents - of priests slaughtered in cold blood, nuns who were made to disappear and children who were given away and whose whereabouts, with the exception of a handful who have been traced to foster parents, are still unknown today.  United States concern over the counter-terrorist tactics being used by the armed forces expressed openly, sometimes aggressively, by Patricia M. Derian, then Assistant Secretary for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, and her staff stopped the ''excesses'' from becoming routine.  In a country numbed into silence by terror from both sides of the political spectrum, thousands of lives were saved by United States diplomacy.  Mr. Alfonsin's election holds out the hope of a new beginning for Argentina's relations with the United States. But renewed friendly relations could founder if President Reagan's commitment to human rights is not as clearly demonstrated toward Latin America as it is toward Poland and the Eastern Bloc countries. Mr. Alfonsin says he believes that President Reagan is more concerned about defending ''cruel capitalism'' than about human rights.  Still, this is a chance for the Reagan Administration to demonstrate its commitment to democracy. Although the scenario has not been written quite the way that Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States delegate to the United Nations, imagined, a truly democratic government has emerged from the ruins of an appalling authoritarian regime. Because the new government is slightly to the left of center, economically and philosophically, Mr. Reagan will be called upon to demonstrate with actions and not merely words that it is really democracy that he cares about and not ideology. Mr. Reagan may take some persuading, but it is in the United States' interest to make a special effort to help Mr. Alfonsin consolidate a country that was until half a century ago, when the first military coup in its modern history took place, an exemplary democracy. Perhaps an even more practical gesture would be to send Mr. Harris back to Argentina as ambassador.  With democracy restored to Argentina, Mr. Alfonsin will be looking to America for a helping hand in another matter. With a $40 billion foreign debt caused largely by lavish spending on arms and squandered on other projects dear to the military, Argentina needs time to pay for the mistakes of the past as well as time to repair them and for the wounds of two terrorisms - of the state and of subversives - to heal."
