"Hundreds of sugar-cane growers converged on this small northwestern town by horse-drawn carriage on a recent Saturday to buy supplies and talk crops and politics over red wine. ''The armed forces aren't worth three cucumbers to us,'' said Ramon Mercado, an agronomist, at Prat's, a favorite bar here.  ''What the terrorists did was minor in comparison to the military,'' said Juan Daniel Acosta, head of a provincial union confederation. Both were among people interviewed during a three-day visit to this and other parts of Tucuman Province, a semitropical area where guerrillas began a leftist insurgency in 1973 and where they were soon wiped out after a drive against them was opened in 1975. 'Repression Was Just' While many people expressed a greater resentment of the military than the guerrillas, others disagreed with such a stance.  ''The repression was just,'' Demetrio Pacheco, a 58-year-old sugar grower said while waiting for a bus in Capitan Caceres. ''We couldn't even leave our homes before.'' His community was among several created for peasants who were moved by the army out of the mountains with the aim of isolating the guerrillas. But Mr. Mercado, who denounced the military while sipping wine in Prat's, said, ''The military is like the estate lawyer who represented you for a percentage of an inheritance, and then stayed on to take it all.'' Sources close to the provincial governor, Antonio Merlo, a retired army general, said even he did not fully support the report issued by the junta on April 28 defending the military's war against leftist terrorism in the 1970's as necessary to preserve the nation. The informants pointed out that the governor had remained silent on the report, which has been criticized by opposition politicians and human rights activists on the ground that it did not explain the fate of the more than 6,000 people who disappeared during the campaign. Tucuman, with one million people, is the smallest and most densely populated province in the country. It is still technically a ''zone of operations,'' the only one in the country. A Reluctant Topic During the interviews, voices and eyes almost always dropped when talk turned to the disappeared. A political leader encountered in a coffee shop constantly looked over his shoulder, explaining that what he called the ''repressive apparatus'' was still intact. ''There is a different reality in the interior,'' said Carmen Mitrovich, head of the largest Tucuman human rights group, Relatives of the Detained and Disappeared. There have been no reported disappearances here in three years, and political freedoms are returning as the country prepares for promised elections in October. But the police still regularly set up roadblocks. Military photographers take pictures at weekly human rights marches. The guerrillas had reportedly selected Tucuman for their operations partly because of its traditionally high unemployment, said today to be around 16 percent. The People's Revolutionary Army, one of three national leftist terrorist bands, was born among accounting students at the University of Tucuman, and took to the surrounding mountains for a rural guerrilla campaign. It was hardly successful. Wiped Out in Nine Months The guerrillas, who numbered fewer than 200, controlled a largely uninhabited mountain strip 30 miles long and 3 miles wide for a time. But when the Government of former President Isabel Martinez de Peron ordered the army into action in 1975, the guerrillas were wiped out in nine months. The disappearances reportedly began after the military overthrew Mrs. Peron in 1976. Relatives say 409 people have disappeared, most of them minor union, political and student leaders and none of them victims of the mountain fighting."
