"To the Editor: William Sloane Coffin (''Nicaragua Is Not an Enemy,'' Op-Ed July 31) is quite right that opponents of the Nicaraguan Government are safer on the streets of Managua than their counterparts in Guatemala and El Salvador. He is wrong when he says that ''no killings or kidnappings have been reported in 'totalitarian' Nicaragua.'' According to the Nicaraguan Independent Commission on Human Rights, 12 people disappeared in 1981, and 11 in 1982. For February of this year, the number was 22. Most of these people disappear after being detained by the state security forces, according to signed statements made by relatives of those who have disappeared. There are also increasing numbers of signed documents in the committee's offices which allege deaths under suspicious circumstances (usually involving the security forces), beatings while in prison and imprisonment without speedy trial. These figures pale in comparison to Guatemala, where various international human-rights organizations estimate between 5,000 and 10,000 deaths since the March 1982 military golpe led by Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, and El Salvador, where civilian casualties, mostly at the hands of the armed forces and paramilitary groups, totaled between 2,500 to 3,000 during the first half of 1983. In Nicaragua, there is little independent evidence on these human- rights abuses, but the unwillingness of the Government to investigate them is not very reassuring. There are three reasons why this information is important. First, Coffin has simply gotten the facts wrong, and should be set straight. Second, no government should be exempt from criticism when it abuses people, or tolerates such abuses, even if its record is good in comparison with that of its neighbors. Finally, and of greatest relevance to citizens of the United States, virtually all the reported disappearances and suspicious killings have taken place in those areas of Nicaragua which are subject to incursions from the counterrevolutionaries supported by our Central Intelligence Agency. Additionally, the volume of human-rights abuses has increased considerably since the counterrevolutionaries first began active harassment in December of 1981. While none of this excuses the behavior of the Nicaraguan Government in failing to investigate abuses, and perhaps even promoting them, it is clear that the most effective way of bringing them to an end would be to withdraw American support of the counterrevolution. RICHARD K. WORTHINGTON, Troy, N.Y., Aug. 2, 1983; The writer is associate professor of political science at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute."
