"Prime Minister Maurice Bishop of Grenada, who has been accused by the Reagan Administration of human rights abuses, has acknowledged that his Government has jailed up to 40 people without charge or trial. The inmates include six who were imprisoned soon after the coup that brought the 39-year-old London-trained lawyer to power in March 1979. In an interview Friday, the Grenadian leader, who is on a weeklong visit to the United States, explained that justice in his country is a complex matter and that the delay in bringing charges ''has to do with the procuring of evidence, the availability of witnesses.'' Sometimes, he said, the ''best available evidence comes from people of that type,'' referring to his secret police. He said he did not want to risk exposing these agents in open court. He declined to say how many are in his secret police but asserted that the number is ''not very big.'' Mr. Bishop said that after a bomb incident his Government spent 18 months finding an expert to match fragments in victims with those of an explosive device. Moreover, he said, ''we are short of prosecutors.'' Ex-Attorney General Held He is holding one, his former Attorney General, Lloyd Noel, under preventive detention. Mr. Noel's friends said he incurred Mr.  Bishop's wrath by urging free elections, a free press and civil rights. Mr. Bishop said Mr. Noel was corrupt. The total of 35 to 40 detainees is well below the 110 that Amnesty International reported in 1981.  Mr. Bishop spent several days this week in Washington where he hoped to see President Reagan. But the Administration snubbed him and offered only an official of ambassadorial rank to see him. ''I am not personally hurt,'' he said. ''It is a matter of the official position of the Government.'' The Reagan snub, he said, ''reflects the fact that careful consideration was not given to the request to initiate a dialogue at a high level.'' The Prime Minister was invited here by TransAfrica, a black American lobbying group that seeks closer United States ties in Africa and the Caribbean. No Independent Newspapers He explained Washington's coldness this way: ''It has to do especially with the concept of strategic consensus, the geopolitical design of the Reagan Administration for the region'' to create governments ''in the image and the likeness of the United States.'' Mr. Bishop acknowledged that there are no independent newspapers in Grenada now. But he said that if opposition publishers would obey his press decree, including a requirement that at least 25 people must have a share in any journal, they could flourish. One was started by three of his former followers, including Mr.  Noel, but this organ, The Voice, was suppressed after one issue.  ''They chose to come out with a paper,'' Mr. Bishop said. ''That's all right, if you're not engaged in acts of violence to overthrow the Government.'' This, he suggested, is why he jailed without trial the paper's three leading figures, Leslie Pierre, Tillman Thomas, whom Mr. Bishop described as ''a former colleague'' at the bar, and Mr. Noel. ''They chose to move to incite sections of the population to armed resistance against the Government,'' he said. Why have they not been charged? Because a charge requires the ''collection, preparation and organization of evidence,'' the Prime Minister said. Mr. Bishop denied charges by his exiled opponents in the Grenada Democratic Movement that he had broken a pledge to hold elections 18 months after seizing power. He said he had promised a vote ''as soon as reasonably practical.'' He said he has selected a panel of eight, including representatives of four ''mass organizations, totally independent,'' to draft a constitition. When it is finished, Mr. Bishop said, a framework for elections will have been created."
