"Bishop John R. McGann of Rockville Centre today asked Roman Catholics on Long Island to lobby for an end to military aid to El Salvador and to urge the United States to grant temporary asylum for an estimated 40,000 Salvadoran refugees now in the Long Island diocese. Bishop McGann's 3,000-word pastoral letter on El Salvador cited several letters from United States Catholic Bishops on El Salvador and comments from Pope John Paul II after his visit to Central America this year. ''The tragedy I have described as existing in El Salvador also has its counterpart here in our diocese,'' the 60-year-old Bishop said.  The pastoral letter was released today, Bishop McGann said, because this week Congress is to hear the State Department's recommendation on continuing American arms shipments to El Salvador. Statements by U.S. Disputed At a news conference in the diocesan television center here, Bishop McGann was accompanied by William Ford, a Manhattan lawyer and a brother of Sister Ita Ford, one of four Maryknoll missionaries killed in El Salvador in 1980, and Sister Helene O'Sullivan, director of the Maryknoll Sisters' Office of Social Concerns. Both disputed statements by the Federal Government that progress was being made into the investigation of the deaths of the missionaries - three American nuns and an American lay person working with them. In the letter, to be distributed throughout the Diocese of Rockville Centre, which covers Nassau and Suffolk Counties, Bishop McGann said that despite the complexities of the situation in El Salvador, ''it seems reasonable to place the root of its problems in the unjust distribution of the resources and of the political power that historically has repressed the masses of the people and favored the interests of a small ruling class.'' 'Stifling' of Human Rights ''In Salvador,'' the letter continued, ''dictatorship and military dominance have combined to stifle human rights and spawn an atmosphere of poverty, hunger and other crimes against humanity.'' Bishop McGann wrote that many Salvadorans in the diocese faced hardship because the United States Government had not admitted that they were refugees. Consequently, he said, they are ''labeled illegal aliens, and as such they can receive no social service or medical benefits.'' Catholic Charities made the estimate that there were 40,000 Salvadoran refugees in the diocese.  The Bishop said the diocese had raised money for a bail fund, and had assembled a social services staff that now works with more than 1,000 refugees. Churches are also providing food and shelter to refugees and programs have been established to teach the refugees English, the pastoral letter noted. ''But the present situation requires justice and justice demands that we do more,'' the letter concluded, asking Catholics to petition Congress for ''an immediate cessation of military aid to El Salvador.''"
