"Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that El Salvador's human rights record met the legal requirements for continued foreign aid, but that its record ''falls short of the broad and sustained progress'' sought by Congress and the Reagan Administration. Under the law, aid to El Salvador can be appropriated only if the Administration certifies every six months that progress is being made in various areas of human rights. In his introduction to the State Department's recertification report issued today, Mr. Shultz gave an unenthusiastic endorsement.  He said he was ''particularly concerned'' by the Salvadoran failure ''to achieve more positive results in establishing discipline over the security forces and in assuring that those, military or civilian, who commit gross violations of human rights will be brought to justice and held accountable under the law.'' ''An especially compelling aspect of this concern for me as Secretary of State,'' he said, ''is the slow progress made thus far by the Salvadoran authorities in bringing the murderers of United States citizens to justice.'' Remains Opposed to Cutting Aid Although he described human rights progress as ''disturbingly slow,'' Mr. Shultz made it clear that he nevertheless was opposed to cutting aid. ''The evolution of democracy is a long and difficult process,'' he said, ''especially when there are concerted efforts to defeat it.'' ''Our disappointment over the pace of change should not obscure the fact that change is occurring,'' he said. ''The people of El Salvador deserve our support in their effort to achieve a truly democratic society, which will provide the best and most lasting safeguard of human rights.'' The report said the number of civilian deaths reported in the press and attributed to political violence rose from 160 a month on the average in the last six months of 1982 to 177 a month in the first six months of this year. This compares to more than 300 a month in late 1981 and early 1982. There were about 39 civilian ''disappearances'' a month in the past year, it said. 'Without Fear of Official Reprisal' The report also said the Salvadoran armed forces were being ''more sensitive'' to the treatment of civilians and of prisoners. But it said the Government was still not able to control fully the actions of the security and armed forces. And it has failed, it said, to create a program ''to identify and punish those responsible for abuses that still take place.'' ''As a result, those elements of the society which operate outside the legal and stated policy restrictions of the Government, including some members of the security forces, generally act without fear of official reprisal,'' the report said. Several human rights groups have criticized the Administration for continuing to assert that enough progress had been made in human rights to warrant continued aid. The Council on Hemispheric Affairs said this afternoon that the latest certification report ''proves, once again, that no governmenttolerated abuses, no matter how grisly, will sway the United States Government from its goal of military victory in El Salvador.''"
