"Adolfo Perez Esquivel stood patiently in sandals petting a white kitten and talking to Mexican television on the phone. It was one of dozens of phone calls that have poured in from all over the world since this morning, when he received a telegram from Norway marked ''urgent.'' ''The Norwegian Nabel Committee has the honour to inform you,'' the telegram said in English, misspelling Nobel, ''that the Nobel Prize for 1980 has been awarded to you. Letter to follow.'' The office about him was shabby, with paint peeling from the ceiling. A bare light bulb was suspended in midair. A picture of Pope John Paul II was tacked on the wall and in a corner sat a chest marked ''Study kit on Mahatma Gandhi.'' Fame Comes Suddenly Adolfo Perez Esquivel (pronounced PEH-rez es-kih-BELL) is relatively unknown even in Argentina, but the telegram has suddenly changed that. His office was crammed with excited supporters and photographers. Only he seemed to be calm, ending the phone call and returning to the interview. ''I accept this prize in the name of Latin America and its workers,'' he said in a soft voice, ''in the name of its campesinos and its priests who are working diligently for the peace and rights of all.'' Mr. Perez Esquivel, head of the Service for Peace and Justice in Latin America, is a Roman Catholic lay leader and human rights activist who has been instrumental in coordinating ecumenical human rights efforts throughout Latin America. Potent Force for Rights Working quietly and tirelessly at the committee level, he and others like him have helped to make churches, particularly the Catholic Church, an increasingly unified and potent force for human rights in a region where many people suffer economic and social deprivation and political repression. One thing that has distinguished Mr. Perez Esquivel from the others is that he has also been an outspoken leader and paid the consequences, Since a military coup in 1976, Argentina has had one of the most violently repressive regimes in Latin America. An advocate of nonviolence, Mr. Perez Esquivel has condemned the junta for the estimated 10,000 to 20,000 people who have ''disappeared'' at the hands of state security forces. He was arrested in 1977, tortured and jailed for more than a year.  He was then placed under house arrest for 14 months more, but emerged from this confinement in September as active on behalf of human rights in Argentina and other Latin American countries as ever. ''I think things have improved here,'' Mr. Perez Esquivel said.  ''But one problem is to find out what happened to the disappeared.  Those who have not been processed and are in prison should either be judged or set free. If there is justice in Argentina, let it be practiced. People have to be respected for what they are - people.'' Mr. Perez Esquivel has been working with the so-called mothers of the Plaza de Mayo, who frequently gather before the presidential palace here to carry on a lonely vigil for their missing children. Most Are Presumed Dead Most of the missing are presumed dead. The Government has resisted an accounting, saying that many are among the unnamed casualties that are part of any war, and it was a war against subversion that the Government says it was fighting. The ''disappearances'' have largely ended in the last year, though human rights groups say that 25 people are suspected of being victims of the practice this year. The award of the Peace Prize to Mr. Perez Esquivel is an embarrassment for the military Government, which was conspicuously silent about it today. Mr. Perez Esquivel said the prize would help ''amplify'' the human rights movement in Argentina and give weight to the pressure on the Government. He would use the prize money, he said, to further those ends. The laureate, a 48-year-old with long disheveled brown hair who was dressed today in a simple blue sweater and trousers, considers himself a follower of Mr. Ghandhi. But Mr. Perez Esquivel is a backrooms man, a committee organizer, not a charismatic public leader. The list of human rights groups he has organized here and worked with in countries such as Chile, Paraguay, Brazil and El Salvador is long. A Sculptor by Profession He is married and has three sons, the oldest of whom, 24-year old Leopoldo, works with him in his quest to better human rights in Latin America. Mr. Perez Esquivel, a sculptor by profession, was a professor of architecture at the National Institute of Fine Arts and many of his works are displayed in museums and plazas here. But he is also an evangelical Catholic akin to the theologians in Latin America who stress the social work of the church. He has dropped his sculpturing almost totally for his human rights crusade. Mr. Perez Esquivel protested violence in Argentina before the military coup, when extreme rightists and leftists terrorized the population and battled each other. In 1972, at about the time he began organizing human right groups in earnest, he engaged in a hunger strike to protest the violence. His own arrest and detention - he was never charged - was widely protested by leading cardinals in Latin America and Europe. He declined today to specify what torture he endured, but in an interview last year he was quoted as having said that he was beaten on the testicles and that water was witheld from him for a week. ''Instead of talking of problems,'' he said today, ''I rather speak of hope. It gives me energy to go ahead and push.''"
