"Pope John Paul II called today for a strengthening of international action against human rights violations in Central America. The Pope's remarks came hours after Guatemala, rejecting a request from the Vatican, executed six men whom a secret military tribunal had found guilty of subversive acts. (Page A9.) In a statement issued here, the Vatican denounced the action as deplorable and ''incredible for its possible grave repercussions at the world and national level as well as at the level of the Holy See.'' The Vatican spokesman, the Rev. Romeo Panciroli, said the Pope had expressed ''profound sadness'' at the news, which the Vatican described as ''dramatic, unexpected and incredible.'' No Change in Plans Indicated The statement gave no indication, however, that the Pope intended to alter his plans to visit Guatemala early next week.  In an address to the Inter-American Court of Human Rights here, the Pope declared that the enforcement of human rights was ''in practice abstract and without effective control mechanisms.'' There must be ''effective instruments of verification and, where necessary, appropriate sanctions,'' he said. While acknowledging that ''control of the respect of human rights belongs above all to each country's judicial system,'' the Pope's statement implied criticism of the court, which has delivered only two opinions since its creation in 1978. Politics Creeps In Vatican officials have said repeatedly that the Pope's eight-day visit to Central America and Haiti is to be religious, not political. But in a region where basic social values contend daily with warring political ideologies, many of his remarks have taken on political overtones. Speaking at the Metropolitan Cathedral here, the Pope warned a gathering of religious workers, ''Do not let yourself be deceived by partisan ideologies; do not succumb to the temptation of options that can exact from you one day the price of your own liberty.'' In a sermon before some 200,000 worshipers in La Sabana, a huge park on the western outskirts of the city, the Pope reminded his faithful to concern themselves ''not only with spiritual things but also with the realities of this world and of the human society of which we are part.'' ''We are exhorted to commit ourselves to the elimination of injustice,'' he continued, ''to work for peace and the conquest of hate and of violence, to promote the dignity of man, to feel responsible for the poor, the ill, the marginal and oppressed, of the refugees, exiles and displaced.'' Conflict for the Church The zeal with which church workers have followed this advice has brought the Roman Catholic Church into conflict with elements of several governments in the region, particularly in El Salvador and Guatemala, both of which the Pope is to visit. A reminder of this came from at least two members of the enthusiastic crowd at La Sabana, Salvadoran exiles who held high banners bearing the likeness of Oscar Arnulfo Romero, the Archbishop of San Salvador who was killed while saying mass in March 1980. His killers are believed to have been members of the Government's security forces. Church officials here said that although it has not appeared on his public schedule, the Pope would visit the tomb of Archbishop Romero shortly before leaving El Salvador next Sunday. Under a huge stone cross, Nicaraguan exiles were gathered, holding small signs saying, ''We Pray for Nicaragua and Poland,'' ''In Nicaragua There Is Religious Persecution'' and ''Priests With Christ and Not Marx.'' On Friday the Pope is to go to Nicaragua, where the leftist Sandinist Government and the church have also been at odds. Religious Fervor in Park For most of the crowd - Costa Ricans whose democratic Government has one of the region's best human rights records - the event was one of pure religious fervor. Passing airplanes sprinkled La Sabana with confetti and flowers as the Pope, dressed in gold and white, began his homily. The people prayed and applauded and waved small Costa Rican and yellow-and-white papal flags. Worshipers who fainted from an excess of excitement or heat were passed politely, hand to hand, over the heads of the crowd to Red Cross workers at its fringes. The appearance at La Sabana was part of a hectic schedule for the Pope in his first full day in Central America. In the morning, he walked through the National Children's Hospital, giving his blessing to the sick children there and praising the doctors for their ''authentic spirit of sacrifice to those who suffer.'' He later made a brief visit to the President of Costa Rica, Luis Alberto Monge. This afternoon, the Pope addressed a gathering of Costa Rican youths in the national stadium. ''You, my beloved children,'' he said, ''have the grave responsibility to break the chain of hate that produces hate, and of violence that engenders violence. You must create a world better than that of your ancestors.''"
