"The Reagan Administration today lifted the five-year-old embargo on arms sales to Guatemala because of what it said were ''significant steps'' taken by the Government to end human rights abuses. The State Department announcement allows Guatemala to buy from the Defense Department $6.3 million worth of spare parts and other equipment for its air force, mostly to rehabilitate American-made helicopters for use against guerrillas. The move, while small in military terms, was viewed by the Administration and its critics as an important symbolic step signifying support for the Government of Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, who overthrew Gen. Romeo Lucas Garcia and seized power last March. 'Progress Has Been Made' Guatemala has been accused by the United States and many human rights groups of repressive tactics and rights violations. But Administration officials have reported an improvement in recent months. ''While we want to see further progress in Guatemala in promoting respect for human rights, President Rios Montt has taken significant steps in this area,'' John Hughes, the State Department spokesman, said. ''Progress has been made.'' The move brought immediate criticism from some members of Congress who have opposed any resumption of military sales to Guatemala.  Representative Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa, introduced a bill, cosponsored by 76 other representatives, to block the sale. More Muted Criticism Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland, the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs subcommittee on Latin America, who has been a strong critic of Guatemala, did not join in the Harkins bill and took a more cautious approach. He said in a statement that while the decision to sell military spare parts was unfortunate, it was necessary to ''recognize that this sale is a fact'' and make sure that it does not open ''the floodgates'' to more military aid. ''My staff and I spend a lot of time talking to Guatemalans who seek a humane, democratic government for their country, and I take their views very seriously,'' Mr. Barnes said. ''I have found that they are not as concerned about this sale itself as they are about the possibility that it will open the floodgates that lead to more military aid. The Administration had felt the spare parts issue, which it inherited, was a lingering irritant in our relations with Guatemala that had to be put behind us. But we have no further commitment of this sort and none should be made.'' The equipment that will be sold to Guatemala for cash has been sought by the Guatemalans since 1979. It includes $2.9 million for communications equipment; $1 million for spare parts for UH-1H helicopters; $1.35 million for inspection and repair of three of those helicopters; equipment for A-37B aircraft flown by the Guatemalans, and other items, including flight uniforms, technical catalogs and spare parts for earthmoving machinery. How the Ban Began Because of Guatemala's human rights record, the Carter Administration in 1978 banned the further sale of items by the Pentagon to that country through the foreign military sales program.  Guatemala, angered over the Administration's human rights report of 1977, had already declined any further aid. In 1980, the Carter Administration banned the sale of military equipment even through commercial channels, although items previously approved could be delivered. Mr. Hughes, in describing the reasons for the end to the embargo, said that since General Rios Montt took power last year, ''political violence in the cities has declined dramatically; recently there are indications that the level of violence in the countryside has declined as well; villagers have been provided food and medical supplies along with the means to defend themselves; plans are under way for the election of a constituent assembly; the Indian population is increasingly participating in the country's political process, and President Rios Montt has been attacking corruption within the Government.'' ''The Government has declared its desire to cooperate with independent human rights groups and United Nations agencies and has permitted a number of private groups to visit the country,'' Mr.  Hughes said. ''These are steps which we feel should be recognized and encouraged.'' The Critics' Explanation Critics of the Administration decision have asserted that the relative calm in Guatemala today is the result of large-scale terrorist raids carried out by the army during the summer against villages. Mr. Harkins said that ''the 'quiet' the Administration cites as justification for the sales is the quiet of the dead.'' ''We should not reward the Government of Guatemala for being particularly effective in its brutality nor for simply moving the Government's violence into the countryside where it may be more difficult to see but is still horribly real,'' he said. Mr. Barnes said that only a few months ago, ''according to the preponderance of the evidence, the Guatemalan army was systematically slaughtering the Indian population'' and that helicopters and the A-37B's were both used. He added, however, that he was ''encouraged by reports I have received that the massacres are ending.'' The American people ''are just not ready to resume a military relationship with Guatemala,'' he said.  President Reagan signaled the decision last month after he met with General Rios Montt while on his stopover in Honduras. After the meeting, Mr. Reagan said that the Guatemalan leader had received ''a bum rap'' and that he was convinced that he was dedicated to making progress toward democracy."
