"Congressional and senior State Department officials said today that the United States was likely to end a long freeze on military aid to Guatemala soon. They said the policy change was expected because of signs that the Government of President Efrain Rios Montt had made progress in improving human rights conditions. The officials said that, as a gesture to the Guatemalan Government, the United States planned to approve the sale of $4 million worth of spare parts for American-made helicopters being used by the Guatemalan Army against leftist rebels. ''I'm sure the Administration is going to do this,'' said Representative Michael D. Barnes, chairman of a House subcommittee on inter-American affairs. Mr. Barnes said he had received no formal notice that a decision had been made, but based his assumption on talks with Administration officials. ''I think it's clear that there's been a change in Guatemala,'' said Mr. Barnes, a Maryland Democrat who has been a leader in Congressional moves to delay the resumption of military aid. Reports 'Still Mixed' ''The reports I've received are still mixed - some quite encouraging, some still pessimistic - but everyone concedes that the Government of Rios Montt seems to be operating in a way that's very different from that of Lucas Garcia in trying to deal with the problems facing the country.'' General Rios Montt took power last March after overthrowing Gen.  Romeo Lucas Garcia.  Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, said in a telephone interview today that he also expected a decision on Guatemalan arms aid to be made soon. ''There seems to be a growing consensus now that Rios Montt really does mean to eliminate political killing and to bring the armed forces under control.'' Mr. Abrams said. ''I think we very much want to encourage him to continue in that, and one way to do so is to give his Government more support than we gave the last Government.'' United States military aid to Guatemala has been cut off since 1977, when Guatemala refused aid after the Carter Adminstration issued a report highly critical of the human rights situation there.  Congress followed by imposing restrictions on military aid, citing human rights violations. But Western officials in Guatemala said last month that Guatemala had continued to receive spare parts and equipment that had been ordered before the Congressional ban. The officials said receipt of the parts had been made possible by loopholes in the Congressional guidelines. Elections Pledged for '84 Since a meeting in Honduras last month between General Rios Montt and President Reagan, there has been considerable speculation that the Administration had decided to go forward with the sale of helicopter spare parts and communications equipment. During the meeting on the last leg of the President's five-day trip to South and Central America, President Rios Montt reportedly pledged that he would rid Guatemala of Government death squads. In addition, he announced that elections for a constituent assembly would be held in early 1984. Speaking to reporters during his trip, Mr. Reagan said that General Rios Montt was committed to making progress toward democracy and that the United States ''will do what it can to support his progressive efforts.''"
