"The initial reaction on Capitol Hill to President Reagan's request for more aid to El Salvador indicates that approval will be conditioned on assurances that El Salvador will take strong steps to curb human rights violations and broaden its political base, according to comments from both Democrats and Republicans. These legislators said that for the President to succeed he would have to lobby intensely. They said he would have a much harder time in the Democratic-controlled House than in the Republican-controlled Senate. ''There's just a strong feeling around here that it's another Vietnam situation,'' Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. said. ''At the same time, nobody wants to see that country go Marxist.'' What are the prospects that the White House will prevail? ''They'll have to do a lot of tearing around,'' the Massachusetts Democrat said. ''The votes aren't here today.'' The Speaker was one of several leaders who were skeptical of Administration reports that the Salvadoran Army suffered a critical lack of supplies. ''We think it's blown out of proportion,'' Mr.  O'Neill said. ''Could things get that bad in a month? We don't think so.'' A similar assessment was made by Representative Silvio O. Conte, Republican of Massachusetts, ranking minority member of the Appropriations Committee. ''It's a Catch-22 situation,'' Mr. Conte said. ''Congress doesn't want to see El Salvador go down, but they don't want to further the killings either.'' ''There's no doubt about it, it's a very difficult, thorny issue,'' he added. Pledge on Combat Troops Facing opposition on the Hill to his proposal to increase military aid to El Salvador, President Reagan today expressed uncertainty about how long the United States would need to continue to send arms to the Central American nation and said, ''We have to stay with this.'' At a brief White House news conference, Mr. Reagan also emphasized that the United States would not send combat troops to help El Salvador repel guerrillas trying to topple the Government there. He said that although the United States sought ''a political and an economic solution'' to the crisis in El Salvador, well-trained guerrillas supported by Cuba and Nicaragua wanted to destroy the nation's economy and democratic institutions. The United States, Mr. Reagan said, had ''an obligation to try and help'' El Salvador defeat the guerrillas.  Mr. Reagan's comments came one day after he proposed an emergency $298 million military and economic aid package for Central America, including $110 million in arms aid for El Salvador. ''I do not see why there is so much opposition to it,'' the President said. ''We have no intention of sending combat forces, nor have we ever been asked for combat forces. And there is no intention of us sending the adviser teams to be with combat units or anything.'' Reagan Rejects Accusations Mr. Reagan rejected Congressional accusations that the Administration was trying to ''blackmail'' and ''pressure'' Congress into approving the new arms package, which includes training, spare parts and ammunition for the Salvadoran forces. Overall proposed military aid to El Salvador this year is now $136.3 million. Mr. Reagan and his aides said Thursday that if the Administration received the aid it sought for El Salvador, then all or most of the additional training of Salvadorans would be outside El Salvador. But if Congress balks, Mr. Reagan indicated, then more advisers will probably be needed in El Salvador. ''There's no blackmail of any kind intended,'' Mr. Reagan said.  Asked if there was any limit to American aid to El Salvador and where it would end, Mr. Reagan replied, ''Where it ends, I think, is with a political and an economic solution.'' Mr. Reagan said the American role would end when the guerrillas stopped trying ''to shoot their way into a ruling position in government'' and Salvadorans had a chance to vote on their own future in democratic elections rescheduled for late this year. Of the $110 million sought by the President, Mr. Reagan seeks $60 million by persuading the Appropriations Committees to redirect money already earmarked for other nations. The remainder would come from a supplemental appropriation, which would be debated and voted upon by both the House and Senate. Some members think the supplemental appropriation will be easier because Congress will be able to attach riders expressing its concerns. Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, chairman of the Foreign Operations subcommittee of the Appropriations Committee, said he would support the President's request only under certain circumstances. His concerns echoed those of many Congressional colleagues. Emphasis on Politics ''I want to see some real convictions on human rights violations and punishment of the offenders,'' he said. ''I want to see greater emphasis on broadening the political process, including guaranteed safety to those participating in the election.'' Mr. Long also called for a shift from military defense to offense, ''and I want to see that their military knows what it's doing,'' he said. ''I'd have to see that they understand what they have to do militarily and economically to turn this around, and not just pour more money year after year into an ever-deepening rathole,'' Mr. Long said. Even with such assurances, Mr. Long said, ''Most people I talk to, liberals and conservatives, are opposed to increasing military aid under any circumstances.'' The liberals opposed increased aid to a nation with broad human rights violations, he said, while conservatives feared there would be ''no end to the money going out.'' A similar view was expressed by Senator Jim Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee, a member of the Appropriations Committee. ''My guess is that the President is going to have great difficulty getting the funds he wants,'' Mr. Sasser said."
