"Secretary of State George P. Shultz, seeking to defuse opposition to increased military aid for El Salvador, told a Senate subcommittee today that Salvadoran leaders had been warned to ''clean up'' their human rights record or lose all American support. Testifying on behalf of the Administration's request to transfer $60 million more for emergency military aid to El Salvador, Mr.  Shultz avoided confrontations with critics on the committee. He did so by agreeing with most of their complaints about human rights abuses in El Salvador, particularly the delay in bringing to trial five former National Guardsmen accused of killing four American churchwomen in December 1980. 'Support Is Going to Dry Up' ''You cannot get me to sit here and defend what has happened under the judicial system of El Salvador,'' Mr. Shultz told Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of Pennslvania. ''I won't do it. I don't do it.  I don't think it is defensible. If they don't clean up this act, the support is going to dry up, and they've been told that and they know that and that will happen.'' Although Mr. Shultz's comments represented the toughest criticism of the Salvadoran human rights record by a senior official, he disagreed with those members of the committee who proposed linking American aid to the holding of the long-delayed trial. He said that would ''denigrate'' the legal system that the Administration was trying to strengthen. Nevertheless, the chairman of the appropriations subcommittee, Bob Kasten, Republican of Wisconsin, said such linkage might be needed to assure approval of the new aid request. Link to Early Trial Weighed Mr. Kasten said late today that as a result of informal discussions with committee members, he thought he had sufficient votes for the funds to go ahead. But he said language was being discussed linking the aid not only to a speedy trial but to the urging of negotiations between the Salvadoran Government and the insurgents and limiting the number of American military trainers in El Salvador. The Administration has a self-imposed limit of 55 advisers in El Salvador, but Mr. Shultz said this limit could be maintained only if the military requests, which call for training of Salvadoran troops in the United States, were met in full. Under the rules of Congress, the Administration's request to transfer $60 million in military aid to El Salvador will go ahead unless either of the foreign operations subcommittees of the Senate or House or the Senate Foreign Relations Committee votes against it by midnight Wednesday. The $60 million in aid was originally planned for Morocco in the current fiscal year. All the involved committees met today to consider the request but no votes were planned before Wednesday morning. In addition to the $60 million in ''repro@grammed'' military aid, the Administration has asked for a further $50 million in military aid in a supplemental bill before Congress. Congress already had approved $26.3 million in military aid for the 1983 fiscal year. The Administration also is asking for $77.1 more in economic aid to be reprogrammed for this fiscal year, in addition to the $150 million already approved. This means the Administration is seeking a total of $363.4 million in military and economic aid for El Salvador for the 1983 fiscal year. Deep Disagreements on Policy The comments from the senators reflected the deep disagreements on Capitol Hill about what American policy toward the situation in El Salvador should be. Senator John C. Stennis, Democrat of Mississippi, who is not a member of the subcommittee but who was present as the ranking Democrat on the full Appropriations Committee, said he would support the $60 million, but told Mr. Shultz he thought a blockade of Cuba might be the better answer, to prevent the flow of arms to the insurgents in El Salvador. A leading Republican conservative, Senator Dennis DeConcini of Arizona, called for action against ''the source'' of the aid for the insurgents, an allusion to Cuba and Nicaragua. Otherwise, he said, the aid effort will fail. On the other side of the issue Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, signaled his opposition to aid on human rights grounds.  Mr. DeConcini asked Mr. Shultz what he thought about using force to stop aid to the insurgents, a plan once given serious thought by Mr.  Shultz's predecessor, Alexander M. Haig Jr., who also advocated going ''to the source.'' 'Contest' With Moscow Cited Mr. Shultz said he agreed with Mr. DeConcini that ''the problem is far broader than a simple American problem; it's a problem of our contest with the Soviet system, the Soviet military power, and with the exertion of that power.'' He said that the way the United States acted in El Salvador would be watched around the world as a test of its ability to ''maintain freedom and democracy.'' But he said wryly that it was ''difficult enough'' to get the committee to approve the current level of 55 American military ''trainers'' in El Salvador, ''let alone one military adviser, let alone a commitment of American troops, so I don't sense any great political mood for us to conduct an armed U.S. force there.'' The theme of human rights violations and the case of the murder of the churchwomen took up much of the hearing.  Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, who indicated he would support the Administration request for the moment, charged the Salvadorans with giving only ''lip service'' to bringing the guilty people to trial. Mr. Shultz, in response to the often emotional charges from the senators, stressed that he was in agreement with them, and had not come to the hearing to whitewash the Salvadoran record. ''I don't think I'm an apologist for anyone,'' he said. 2,000 Troops Reported in Drive SAN SALVADOR, March 22 (AP) -About 2,000 troops began a drive today against leftist guerrillas in the northern province of Chalatenango, local military and civilian sources reported. A military source in the city of Chalatenango, the provincial capital 45 miles north of San Salvador, said the troops included members of two United States-trained battalions. He declined to give details about the operation."
