"What follows is for readers with strong stomachs.  ''We were told again and again of government soldiers, in uniform, arriving at a village, rounding up men and women and shooting them.  ''But they apparently don't waste bullets on children. They pick them up by the feet and smash their heads against a wall. Or they tie ropes around their necks and pull them until they are strangled. We heard of children being thrown in the air and bayoneted.'' That is not a description of what happened in Cambodia years ago under the genocidal regime of Pol Pot. It is an account of what is being done right now by the Government of Guatemala - a government that has the support of the President of the United States. The account comes from a New York lawyer, Stephen L. Kass, who has just been interviewing refugees from Guatemala. He and another specialist in Latin American affairs, Robert L. Goldman, professor of international law at American University, went to southern Mexico to speak with refugees who had recently crossed the border. Can such horror stories really be true? I asked Mr. Kass.  ''We were told this kind of thing over and over along the border,'' he answered. ''We were told it by men, we were told it by women, we were told it by children - at different places, by people who could not have known each other.'' The two lawyers, who were looking into the situation for the Americas Watch Committee, interviewed refugees in Spanish at the Pacific Ocean end of the Mexican-Guatemalan border. Then they flew to airstrips in a mountainous jungle region to visit two refugee camps a mile or two from the central part of the border. Between 50,000 and 80,000 Guatemalan peasants have fled across the border in the last year or so. The flow is continuing - several thousand have come into organized refugee camps in the last two months. ''We believe there is a continuing pattern of almost indiscriminate violence directed at Indian peasant communities,'' Mr. Kass said. ''Any village regarded by the local army commander as not firmly supportive of government efforts to destroy subversion is regarded as subversive itself -and, as such, a free-fire zone. ''It is a level of butchery that seems unimaginable but is true.  ''When survivors from these villages try to live in the hills, the army destroys their crops. We heard that repeatedly, again from many different people. Helicopters are used to patrol the tillable areas and fire on people who try to grow things. ''And in our conversations with even the poorest Indians, they knew the United States supplied the helicopters and supported this government.'' General Efrain Rios Montt installed himself as president of Guatemala in a coup last March. When President Reagan toured Latin America last year, he met General Rios Montt and rejected criticism of Guatemala's human rights record. ''Frankly,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''I'm inclined to believe they've been getting a bum rap.'' The Administration then announced that Guatemala would be allowed to buy spare parts for helicopters and aircraft, after years of embargo. The reality of what government forces do in Guatemala - or for that matter the El Salvador Army's continuing butchery of civilians - contrasts almost comically with the noble images President Reagan evoked in asking Congress to send more military aid to Salvador. Our goal in Cen-tral America, he said, is ''to replace poverty with development and dictatorship with democracy.'' We insist on a ''legitimate road to power,'' not rule ''without the consent of the people.'' If the Reagan Administration were candid with the American people about its policy in Central America, it would say something like this: ''The governments we support in Guatemala and El Salvador do not live up to our most modest idea of decency. They murder their own citizens in large numbers, and the few rich brutally oppress the many poor. Moreover, they pay little attention to our views. Guatemala won't even let the International Red Cross look at its prisoners, and El Salvador has not convicted one official for the thousands of murders. But they are our allies against communism. They serve our strategic interest, and that is why we must support them.'' The Administration will not say that - because Americans would not stand for it. We are not that kind of people. We do not want such horrors condoned in our name: not even to put down communism - if the policy would, which it will not. And I wonder about Ronald Reagan. There is a real possibility that he believes all those hypocritical statements about how Central America would be fine if only the Communists left it alone. If he knew what was happening - if he knew that children were being murdered - would he actually want to pay that price?"
