"To the Editor: In the extensive press coverage of the extradition of Klaus Barbie, ''the butcher of Lyon,'' from Bolivia to France to face charges of crimes against humanity, few reports and comments have given proper credit to the young democratic Government of Bolivia. Only Beate Klarsfeld, the Nazi-hunter responsible for locating Barbie in Bolivia years ago, highlighted the fact that the successive Bolivian military dictatorships of recent years not only protected Barbie but made him an influential adviser on ''state security'' affairs (i.e., repression). The fledgling Government of Hernan Siles Suazo, overcoming formidable pressures, apprehended Barbie and lived up to Bolivia's international obligations to do its part in ensuring that crimes against humanity will not go unpunished. This is not the only sign of Bolivia's new commitment to human rights. All political prisoners, including some who were listed as ''disappeared,'' have been released, and active efforts are under way to investiagte and prosecute violations by former regimes. This is in stark contrast to recent actions of many governments considered friendly to the United States, such as Guatemala and Chile, which have enacted amnesty laws whose sole effect is to ensure impunity for their own agents guilty of abductions, torture and murders. Yet these and other governments that in effect encourage and cover up such crimes ''get some points'' (in the words of Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights Elliott Abrams) for being pro-American and are praised for alleged ''improvements'' in human-rights performance. It is high time that the Government of Bolivia be acknowledged and supported for showing its willingness, despite serious threats of a military coup, to live up to the pledge of the international community since World War II: that egregious violators of human dignity who act in abuse of governmental authority not be allowed to escape prosecution. JUAN E. MENDEZ, Director, Washington Office, Americas Watch, Washington, Feb. 10, 1983"
