"President Reagan certified to Congress today that despite ''great obstacles'' El Salvador was not only making progress on human rights but was also laying the foundation for democratic government. Such a certification on progress in human, political and economic rights in El Salvador is required every six months as a condition for continuing military aid to that country. At stake is $25 million in military aid Congress has approved for this fiscal year, but the Administration may seek an increase later this year, officials said. The 67-page report sent to Congress this afternoon ''describes the beginning of a process of building democratic structures and principles,'' the report said. 'It Is Progress Nonetheless' ''The situation is not perfect and the progress was not as great as desired,'' the document continued. ''But it is progress nonetheless.'' The certification was expected, and several human rights groups and critics of the Administration's policy criticized the decision even before the report was issued. The report said that ''despite great obstacles, many still beyond its immediate control, the Government of El Salvador has made progress'' in each of the areas specified in the 1981 law that mandated certification. ''No major reverses were registered'' in El Salvador's commitment to progress on human rights, the report said. The report acknowleged, however, that ''human rights abuses continue'' and that ''further development of democracy and the protection of human rights are not to be taken for granted.'' Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, and Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, stressed two areas of concern as they outlined the report's conclusions. They cited first what the report called the ''systematic ineffectiveness of El Salvador's criminal justice procedures, particularly in cases originating in political violence,'' and second the ''need for further improvement in military discipline, which must be strengthened within individual security force units on a nationwide basis.'' Mr. Enders cited El Salvador's release of two Salvadoran officers implicated in the murder of two American land redistribution consultants in January 1981 as a key example of the failure of that country's criminal justice system. But he said that there had been significant progress in efforts to prosecute the accused murderers of four American churchwomen in El Salvador in December 1980. This assertion was challenged by Representative Mary Rose Oakar, Democrat of Ohio, who has acted as a link with the slain women's families. Tonight she called the certification an ''outrage.'' The report noted that ''political violence continued to diminish - although at a slower rate than at the time of the previous certification.'' It attributed this to ''increased consciousness by the Government of the importance of more effective action on human rights, including formation of new institutions for this purpose.'' Specifically, the document said civilian deaths due to political violence had fallen from 800 a month in late 1980 to 200 a month in the last six months of 1982. But the report noted that the rate of decline in the country has slowed in the past six months. 'Slow Progress' Noted When asked about higher death estimates presented by some human rights organizations, Mr. Enders replied that the higher figures included deaths of guerrillas and others insurgents killed in fighting. By contrast, the Administration's figures, based largely on embassy surveys of deaths reported in four daily newspapers, were limited to civilians whose deaths were attributed to political violence. The Administration also maintained that ''efforts to control abuses by members of the armed forces were the subject of increased attention by the Government of El Salvador'' and continued to show ''slow progress.'' For example, the document said the Salvadoran armed forces maintain that 80 percent of about 33,000 active duty personnel in the military and security forces have received human rights instructions from the International Committee of the Red Cross. The Administration said the redistribution of farmland to peasants, a program whose future was in doubt during the previous certification period, was ''vigorously relaunched.'' More than 20 percent of El Salvador's farmland has been redistributed to 65,000 peasants, the report said. Report Signed by Shultz Finally, it cited progress in the nation's effort to establish democratic structures. ''The process rooted in the March 1982 Constituent Assembly elections proved resistant to minority or individual efforts at manipulation,'' the report concluded. The report was based on interviews and information accumulated by American Embassy officials and by other State Department officials from the human rights and Latin American bureaus. It was then screened by an interagency group and signed by Secretary of State George P. Shultz. The Administration's certification decision was swiftly denounced by several legislators and by civil liberties and human rights groups. The American Civil Liberties Union said in a statement that Salvadoran Government forces or paramilitary groups aligned with them were responsible for at least 5,339 political murders in the past year. ''The number of reported and verified political murders demonstrates that the human rights situation is worse than ever,'' the A.C.L.U. and Americas Watch, a human rights group, concluded in a joint statement. ''Unmistakable physical evidence of torture, starvation and malnutrition'' were charged today by a team of seven American doctors and nurses who returned this week from a visit to El Salvador. The trip, sponsored by eight health groups, including the American Public Health Association, included tours of hospitals, clinics, prisons, and a refugee camp. The medical team, which visited the country two years ago, was attempting to investigate the disappearances of health workers and other reported abuses. They said they found a marked deterioration in conditions in El Salvador since their previous visit. Salvador Hails Certification SAN SALVADOR, Jan. 21 (AP) -Salvadoran officials are pleased with the Reagan Administration's determination that it is making progress in curbing human rights abuses, a Government spokesman said today. ''All Government officials have received news of the certification with much pleasure because it is consistent with the progress that has been made in our country, despite the abnormal situation,'' said a presidential spokesman, Alfonso Salazar, alluding to the civil war with leftist guerrillas."
