"Representative Stephen J. Solarz, a Democrat from Brooklyn, sat more than 2,400 miles away from home in a cellblock at the Mariona Prison here. In an I-can-take-anything tone he asked five of the political prisoners to describe the torture they had been subjected to after being arrested. Rafael Antonio Carrias, a secondary school teacher who said he was not sure why he was in prison, told how he had received chemical burns, and pulled off his shirt to show a three-inch scar that began in the middle of his chest and made a rutted path across his back.  Mr. Solarz lifted his eyebrows and quickly looked down at the floor, but the prisoner did not understand that his visitor had seen enough and began to unbuckle his Levi's. ''No, no,'' the Congressman said softly. Like 10 other members of Congress, including Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, and Representative Jim Leach, Republican of Iowa, Mr. Solarz visited San Salvador last week to find out what is happening in this land about the size of Massachusetts that received $279 million in military and economic assistance from the United States last year. The Reagan Administration must certify this month that El Salvador is making progress in human rights and economic and political improvements in order for the military part of the aid to continue.  By the end of the month, some 16 delegations, including Congressmen, doctors, lawyers and academics, will visit the capital. Reality 'Hard to Grasp' Mr. Solarz said on arriving last Thursday, ''The purpose of my trip is to put an end to the violence.'' After three days of being shuttled around in armored vans to talk with business and political leaders, as well as prisoners and farmers, Mr. Solarz concluded: ''It is very hard to grasp what the reality of this place is. El Salvador is like a Kabuki play: all of the actors are wearing masks. When you talk to some of the heads of the security forces that have been responsible for killing civilians they sound like leaders of Amnesty International.'' By the end of his visit Mr. Solarz still believed, as he had when he arrived, that the war would end only through negotiations. But he also had begun to understand that such a clear-cut proposal has its problems in a country as complicated as El Salvador. ''I hadn't fully appreciated how power in El Salvador is fragmented,'' he said on his last evening here. ''The Government presides very tenuously over the country. The right here holds power that is disproportionate to their numbers.''  Union Wants a Role In his 72 hours in San Salvador, Mr. Solarz asked those he met whether they thought his proposal that the United States refuse military aid unless the Government ends the killing of civilians and agrees to unconditional talks with the leftist opposition was a good idea. The responses he received were not as straightforward as the proposal. ''We believe that any aid should be very well conditioned,'' Jorge Camacho, the president of a peasants' union, said at a breakfast with the Congressman. But Mr. Camacho had something else on his mind. ''First there should be a dialogue with us,'' he said, referring to the peasants. ''Simplistically, dialogue is possible for all of us, but we have to adapt that to reality. The left might propose a dialogue, but while they are proposing it they are still attacking the villages.'' Another of the farmers added: ''Believe us, we are not against a dialogue, as long as participation is given to a majority of the workers. Now we only hear of dialogue on the right or the left and not the working class.'' Some Tell of Torture Mr. Solarz stuck by his idea of unconditional talks and drove on to the Mariona Prison on the outskirts of the capital where 652 of the 1,090 inmates are political prisoners, most of whom have not been informed of a trial date. The inmates are locked up, four to a small cell, in the evening.  Otherwise, they can walk around a courtyard that is somewhat larger than a football field. While some said they had been tortured after their arrest, most apparently considered themselves lucky to have made it to Mariona alive. The inmates made it clear that the Congressman could help them most by continuing to exert pressure on the Government to improve its record on human rights. ''Who do most of the people support?'' Mr Solarz asked. ''The great majority support the leftists,'' said Carlos Molina, a 35-year-old imprisoned economist. ''But that doesn't mean that there aren't other political parties.'' Politics 'a Private Matter' It was the ''other'' political parties that were giving Mr. Solarz some trouble. While he said that some of the country's leaders privately supported his proposal for unconditional negotiations, he acknowledged that others either refused to talk with the left or hedged. Some of those he approached rejected any talk of politics. When the Congressman pressed the directors of a farming cooperative whom the community had supported in the last election, one of the board members smiled broadly and said, ''That is a private matter.'' When it was suggested that his proposal did not take into account the complications of the fragmented Government, the Congressman became impatient. ''I realize that there are people who couldn't give a damn here about military aid,'' Mr. Solarz said. ''But it might be possible to isolate these people.''"
