"Words tell a lot about the mood in El Salvador now that President Duarte has for the first time met in La Palma with leftist guerrillas. Suddenly the insurgents who had been ''terrorists'' in official broadcasts were ''the ones who had taken up arms.'' As politely, the rebel radio dropped references to ''the puppet Duarte'' and spoke instead of the ''regime of Jose Napoleon Duarte.'' Bitterer words, and deeds, will have to be swallowed before these adversaries can end a fearful civil war that has claimed 50,000 lives in five years. But just possibly the actors will become captives of the hopes they have aroused by promising to ''humanize'' the conflict through a peace commission and a second meeting in late November. Something very like that happened after Egypt's President, Anwar Sadat, flew to Jerusalem to acknowledge the existence, and humanity, of Israel. All such parallels are treacherous, but there is a touch of Sadat in the boldness of Mr. Duarte's leap. His invitation to the guerrillas was his own idea, according to Thomas Pickering, the United States Ambassador in San Salvador. Taken by surprise, Mr. Duarte's American partners are clambering aboard the peace convoy. President Reagan calls the talks ''momentous,'' and the State Department detects vindication for its promotion of the spring elections that Mr. Duarte won. If these negotiations prove successful, there is vindication enough for all American factions: the Administration for its persistent effort to bolster the San Salvador Government; its critics for insisting that the aid be conditioned on taming the death squads and curbing coup-minded rightists. That Mr. Duarte's timing was right seems to be confirmed by the minimal quibbling in arranging the meeting on a week's notice. All concerned had ample chance to seize on pretexts for staying away, but all showed up except for one guerrilla commander who blamed logistics rather than politics. Now they face competing ideas for letting elections resolve a military conflict that neither seems powerful enough to win anytime soon. The rebels' have insisted all along that their price for participation is a share of power in an interim regime. That has been repeatedly rejected by Mr. Duarte, who wants the opposition to lay down its arms and take its chances in next year's local elections. There may just be room between these positions for a bargain that would give the left a voice in an electoral commission with enough security powers to assure a peaceful plebiscite. There is nothing hypothetical about the left's obsession with security. The death squads, though in abeyance, are still intact. And as the first elected civilian President in five decades, Mr. Duarte still rules by military sufferance. Human rights abuses have abated, but the suspicious killing of civilians in military operations continues. It was with an eye to these realities that Mr. Duarte chose the date for his rendezvous in La Palma. Monday marked the fifth anniversary of the coup led by reformist officers against a despotic military dictatorship. But within months a military backlash promoted by the hard right ended the experiment and ignited the civil war. The promise of change in 1979 was aborted by repression and the rise of the insurgency. El Salvador's friends now need above all to protect this new promise against the inevitable reaction from both extremes."
