"Americas Watch, a human rights organization based in the United States, accused Peru's civilian Government today of ''fighting terror with terror'' in its effort to combat a rural insurgency movement inspired by Maoism. The organization said several hundred people had disappeared and more than 4,000 had died as a result of the continuing conflict between Government security forces and the Sendero Luminoso - ''Shining Path'' - guerrilla movement that has been active in Indian villages surrounding the Ayacucho region of Peru since 1980. In a 161-page report, Americas Watch described the group, which has also carried out sabotage and occasional assassinations in Lima, as ''the most brutal and vicious guerrilla organization that has yet appeared in the Western Hemisphere.'' But it blamed many ''extremely serious abuses of human rights'' - torture, disappearances, executions and massacres - on Government forces. Over the past three months, in the Ayacucho region, numerous mass graves have been uncovered containing some corpses ''identified as individuals who were reportedly arrested by the security forces,'' the report said. U.S. Also Criticized  The report also criticized the Reagan Administration for what it said was its failure to issue a public condemnation of human rights violations in Peru while stepping up assistance to the armed forces considered responsible for many of the abuses. (There was no immediate comment from Peruvian officials in Lima. In Washington, a State Department spokesman said the department would have no immediate response.) ''The present human rights situation in Peru is bleak and it has the potential to get far worse,'' the report said, with an added warning: ''All the evidence suggests that, far from crushing Sendero Luminoso, the tactics of the armed forces and the police have been counterproductive. Today, by the Peruvian Government's own estimate, Sendero Luminoso is stronger than ever.'' Variations among the official estimates of the group's strength, which range from 2,000 to 7,000 militants, underline how little is still known about the movement. Having worked among the impoverished Quechua Indians of the southern Andes for several years before taking up arms, the movement appears to have a broader social base than the Government has admitted. Americas Watch, formed principally by United States lawyers in 1981 to promote human rights in the Western Hemisphere, has previously published reports on nine Latin American countries, including Cuba, Nicaragua, Chile and El Salvador. Authority Said to be Abdicated  This report, entitled ''Abdicating Democratic Authority,'' is the group's first on Peru, which in 1980 returned to civilian rule after 12 years of military government. The report was prepared after a trip to Peru in December 1983 by Aryeh Neier, Vice Chairman of Americas Watch, and Stephen Kass, a partner in the New York law firm of Berle, Butzel, Kass & Case. The report also includes more recent information provided by researchers in Peru. The report noted that the Peruvian President, Fernando Belaunde Terry, had strongly resented earlier criticism of human rights violations by such outside groups as Amnesty International, and that many Peruvians feared that such criticism could undermine the elected Government and bring on a new military coup. The report added: ''The last thing we want to do is contribute to any effort to undermine democratic rule and pave the way for what could be far worse. At the same time, we believe that it is a great mistake to remain silent about the gross abuses taking place in Peru.'' Americas Watch conceded that ''the country would require extraordinary leadership deeply committed to human rights to wage an effective fight against Sendero's terror without resorting to counterterror.'' ''Unfortunately, the democratically elected Government has not provided such leadership,'' the report went on. ''Indeed, it has abdicated authority.'' In 13 provinces, responsibility for combating the insurgents has been passed entirely to the armed forces since last July, the report said, adding that the results have included not only a weakening of civilian authorities but also a sharp rise in official violence. It described a two-part approach involving distribution of food and seeds to ''friendly'' villages, and fierce reprisals against villages thought to sympathize with the guerrillas. Americas Watch said there were also confirmed reports of executions and murders carried out by Sendero Luminoso, but it said the authorities routinely blamed most acts of violence in the Ayacucho region on the guerrillas and information was often difficult to corroborate independently."
