"The eight remaining members of Argentina's highest military court submitted their resignations today. In an unusual move, the judges stepped down after Defense Minister Raul Borras refused to defend the court against criticism that it was delaying the trials of military officers accused of civil rights abuses. The ninth judge resigned earlier this week. Horacio Jaunarena, Under Secretary of Defense, said the court would to carry on until the Minister decided whether to accept the resignations. Mr. Jaunarena said the judges, who are retired military officers, presented their resignations individually in a meeting with the Minister, but he declined to say why they had resigned. The move is seen as a rebuff to President Raul Alfonsin, Argentina's first civilian leader in eight years, who has made the prosecution of military officers accused of rights abuses one of the priorities of his administration. If the resignations are accepted, Mr. Alfonsin has the choice of naming new judges or having the officers tried by civilian courts. The cases against nine former junta members, charged with ordering the murder and torture of thousands of people, have already been transferred to a civilian court. The military court was supposed to try 200 cases, including those against Gen. Luciano Benjamin Menendez, a provincial commander, and Gen. Ramon Camps, national police chief. ''The trials now remain without judges and I don't think they can be replaced because no military man will accept the posts,'' said Emilio Mignone, director of the Center for Legal and Social Studies. He said his institute had asked for the transfer to civilian courts. The dispute began last week when the military tribunal asked the Defense Minister to defend it against criticism over the delay of the pending cases. The Minister rejected the request on Friday, saying, ''As with every important social task, the activity of this court is open, in a democratic society, to the judgment of public opinion.'' In the same letter, the Minister said that the armed forces should distance themselves ''from those who abused their positions to commit attacks outside the battlefield.'' Military officials say the accused officers did not commit any crimes, and were successful in ridding Argentina of urban guerrillas. However, a presidential commission has said that the military was responsible for killing thousands of innocent civilians."
