"Recent crackdowns by the regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, including the detention of some 200 protestors two weeks ago, have raised new questions about the Reagan Administration's desire to lift the United States embargo on arms to Chile. A year ago, at Mr. Reagan's urging, Congress authorized him to lift the ban, which it had imposed six years before because of human rights abuses. But it stipulated that the President must first certify three things: Chile had made ''significant progress'' in improving human rights; it was in the ''national interest'' to end the embargo; and Chile had ''taken appropriate steps'' to bring to justice the assassins of Orlando Letelier, a former Chilean Foreign Minister who was killed in Washington in 1976. Apparently the Administration believes all three conditions have been met because it is reported to have prepared a draft certification. The human rights record has clearly improved in Chile, but the point is whether it has improved enough to satisfy Congress. General Pinochet took power in a 1973 coup that overthrew Marxist President Salvador Allende Gossens. The hundreds of assassinations and disappearances that followed virtually ended in 1979, according to Chilean human rights groups and the Roman Catholic church. But other violations - torture, detention, political imprisonment, internal banishment and exile - have continued at significant levels for the last three years. For example, the church said there were 137 political prisoners on Oct. 31. More than 1,000 people were reportedly detained for varying periods in 1982 for political violations. Government officials counter that a program under study to allow many of the estimated 10,000 to 35,000 exiles abroad to return to Chile is evidence of their intention to continue progress. But the recent detentions and the exiling of such outspoken critics as Manuel Bustos, a labor leader, and Carlos Podlech, head of the wheat growers' association, reflect what the critics see as limited constitutional freedom inside Chile, to say the least. The Constitution extends General Pinochet's rule until at least 1989 and gives the police extraordinary detention and punishment powers. Approval by more than 60 percent of Chile's voters in a plebiscite two years ago partly reflected the trauma of the Allende years but it also resulted from the limits placed on opposition campaigning. The plebiscite came at a time when the Chilean economy was booming. Today it is in deep recession and the regime is consequently much less popular. Church and human rights leaders, nonetheless, sadly acknowledge that human rights abuses are not a major concern to most Chileans.  That would seem to suggest that lifting the arms embargo would be popular here. But neighboring Argentina may be a lesson. The thousands of Argentine disappearances were once ignored or justified by the public there, too. Today, as censorship has eased and information about the missing has emerged, the disappeared are a key political issue. Washington, because of its standoffish policy toward Buenos Aires, including an arms embargo imposed four years ago, is seen by many Argentines and civilian political leaders as having been a beneficent power. It is impossible to predict how post-Pinochet Chile will view the United States if it offers military cooperation to the regime. But many human rights leaders said they would regret the loss of outside pressure. ''Clearly, whatever support a government gives for human rights helps,'' said Msgr. Juan de Castro Reyes, a church official who looks after human rights and welfare questions. However, United Nations pressure, in the form of a resolution against Chile by the General Assembly, provoked the Government two weeks ago into an angry refusal to cooperate further with human rights agencies of all international organizations. But Chileans appear to have a greater preoccupation. Chile and Argentina almost went to war in 1978 because of a dispute over the Beagle Channel, at the tip of the continent. The Chileans fear that Argentina, having lost to Britain in the Falkland Islands, may try to restore its pride by seizing the channel. Argentina, much bigger and stronger than Chile, is rapidly replacing its Falkland losses. With the American arms market closed to them, the Argentines have been buying in Europe and Israel.  Europe's many Socialist Governments have restricted sales to Chile, however, never having forgiven the Pinochet forces for responsibility in the death of Mr. Allende. Reagan Administration officials, citing their lack of influence in the Falkland war, argue that the United States could better influence Argentina and Chile if it were a principal supplier to both. ''What we're trying to do in this Administration is get back in the game and maintain regional balances,'' a senior official said. ''It is in our interest to prevent war.'' Consequently, one embargo is not likely to be lifted without the other. In the Letelier case, an American grand jury in 1978 indicted three Chilean secret agents for the murder. But the Chilean Supreme Court refused to extradite them, ruling that the evidence was insufficient. The indictments were won with evidence gained from plea bargaining with Michael Townley, an American who admitted helping the Chilean police. The Chileans do not recognize plea bargaining. State Department officials have testified in Congress that Chile has complied within the bounds of its laws and that six years of arms embargo have been punishment enough. Many in the Justice Department fought to continue the pressure for the extraditions but State won out, Administration officials said."
