"To the Editor:  As someone who has followed U.S.- Chilean relations for the last five years, I must take issue with the statement by Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights (letters, Dec. 18) that the Reagan Administration has supported a return to democracy in Chile. The record shows otherwise. When President Reagan took office four years ago, all pressures against the Chilean military regime were lifted. Sanctions imposed on the Pinochet regime for failing to extradite those responsible for the 1976 assassination of Orlando Letelier and Ronni Moffitt were lifted, the policy of voting ''no'' on loans from multilateral lending institutions to countries that violate human rights was reversed, and the Kennedy amendment, which prohibited military and economic aid from the U.S. Government to the military regime, was repealed. These specific policy actions by the Reagan Administration have led both the opposition and General Pinochet to believe that the U.S. is on the side of the dictatorship. While the State Department has issued public statements ''criticizing'' the human-rights situation in Chile, these statements have strongly condemned neither the deteriorating situation nor the reimposition of the state of siege. And actions speak louder than words. While Mr. Abrams refers to Richard Schifter's comments at the United Nations, he omits to say that these remarks were followed, incredibly, by a ''no'' vote by the U.S. on a resolution condemning recent human-rights violations. Moreover, since the state of siege was initiated - bringing about the arrest of thousands, the internal exile of over 500, total censorship of the press and general terror - the U.S. has voted ''yes'' on loans totaling $160.7 million (pending are loans worth $236 million) to Chile. This is a violation of Congressional law, which states that the U.S. must vote ''no'' on loans to governments that consistently violate human rights.  What kind of message does this send the Chilean people and General Pinochet? That while the State Department may publicly scold the military regime for human-rights violations, concrete U.S. policy of support for the dictatorship will not change, even in the face of escalating and brutal repression. ELIANA LOVELUCK Letelier-Moffitt Human Rights Project Institute for Policy Studies Washington, Dec. 10, 1984"
