"To the Editor:  I agree with Prof. Roy A. Glasgow's Nov. 30 letter deploring the failure to appoint a black to Brazil's commission to edit five books for the 1988 centennial of the abolition of slavery in Brazil. Brazil is a complex mixture of advanced racial democracy and discrimination, difficult for North Americans to understand. Professor Glasgow's use of the term ''Afro-Brazilian'' as synonymous with ''black'' is perhaps imprecise. A very high proportion of Brazilians are likely to possess some African genes, with the exception of those in the European enclaves of south Brazil, recent immigrants and the aborigines of Amazonas. This is due to the centuries of genetic equilibration of the Luso-Brazilians (1450- 1888) with African slaves, and also due to their Moorish system of domestic slavery, in which the slave was a member of an extended family.  In addition to ''white'' and ''black,'' there is a whole series of acceptable descriptive terms in popular use in Brazil to describe ethnic mixtures, the most common being ''mulato'' and ''moreno.'' The classification is determined by skin color, type of hair and configuration of nose and mouth. The census data for Brazil, as was implied by Professor Glasgow, likely represent an underestimate of the degree of African genic mixture, since ethnic identity was reported by respondents or census takers, not by objective anthropological standards.  In contrast, in the United States, only the stark terms ''black'' and ''white'' are in current vogue. In some instances ''black'' may be used to describe remote degrees of African ancestry (one thirty-second, in a recent Louisiana case, ''Woman Seeks Change in Racial Designation,'' Nov. 23). It is ironic that U.S. laws, as in the Louisiana case, may call up the memory of slavery even unto the fifth generation, whereas in Brazil, the decree of Ruy Barbosa in 1891 wiped out that memory by ordering all records of slavery to be destroyed, thus preventing the perpetuation of any documentary stigma. Indeed, this lack of original historical data may cause some difficulties for the 1988 centennial commission.  We must not forget that progress in civil rights in the United States is watched intently by Brazilians. Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation in 1863 was a crystallizing force in precipitating abolition in Brazil.  The recent interest among slum dwellers of Rio de Janeiro in exercising their franchise, as well as the possibility of a constitutional electoral process for the country, hold promise for the Brazilian underclass of darker skin. LYTT I. GARDNER, M.D.  Director, Regional Genetic Center SUNY, Upstate Medical Center Syracuse, Dec. 5, 1984"
