"His eyes still bleed. In September, the young leftist activist said, paramilitary police officers placed caps on his eyeballs and rhythmically tapped them with a metal hammer. His captors also prodded his tongue with live electric wires, put him through mock executions and held his head under water in a game they called ''the submarine,'' he said. The prisoner was released several weeks ago after a judge and doctors intervened, corroborating much of his story. It happened not in some infamous dictatorship, but in democratic and generally enlightened Spain. The victim was a suspected Basque terrorist. According to Amnesty International, which won the Nobel Prize in 1977 for keeping track of human rights violations, one-third of the world's countries have tortured or cruelly treated prisoners in the last four years. The accused violators, almost all of which deny the allegations, range across the political spectrum from the Soviet Union to Chile, from Uganda to Vietnam. Some countries have added new methods to the ancient techniques of beatings, dripping water, stretching on the rack, and hanging prisoners by their arms, feet or other extremities. This makes torture harder to detect. Doctors and medical technicians in the interrogation centers of Chile's secret police reportedly monitor victims to insure that just the right amount of electric shock is administered without stopping the heart or leaving skin marks. The Chilean Medical Society is investigating. The Syrians have perfected the ''black slave,'' an electrical apparatus that inserts a heated metal skewer into the victim's body, according to survivors. In Guatamala, torture victims have reported nearly suffocating when inner tubes stuffed with quicklime were pulled over their heads. Prisoners in Rwanda have been held for more than a year in ''cachets noirs,'' cells devoid of light. The Russians have abused prisoners of conscience in mental hospitals, forcibly administering pain-causing and disorienting drugs, Amnesty has reported.  Graham Greene once wrote that only the lower class was liable to torture in Latin America, but today, distinctions of class, age and sex have broken down everywhere. Children have reportedly been tortured in El Salvador. In Iran, children are forced to witness the torture of their mothers, according to Amnesty. Women in many countries have been especially brutalized. ''The horror. Oh, the horror,'' said Ernesto Sabato, a novelist and head of an offical Argentine commission investigating the disappearances of thousands of people under military dictatorship in the 1970's. He has had to review hundreds of macabre torture tales. Most torturing is done secretly, often by a grim subclass of torturers who are themselves sometimes victims of a sort. They are often fanatical believers or psychologically deranged, specially trained, and motivated by privileges and brainwashing and, eventually, by fear of retribution, according to the few available studies. In Argentina, some former torturers have gone to the Sabato commission seeking absolution. Ideology becomes meaningless, some have testified, as violence takes hold like a disease and becomes an end in itself. This may partly explain why torture, once started by police forces, often becomes institutionalized and difficult for governments to control. In Spain, for example, nine years after the death of Francisco Franco, torture is apparently rare. But the Socialist Government of Felipe Gonzalez has yet to totally end the dictator's police practices. The Terrorist RationaleTorture as a method of intimidation, punishment or interrogation may be as ancient as recorded civilization. But more recently, urban terrorism such as the French experienced in Algiers in the 1950's has sometimes given torture a measure of popular support; People justify it as necessary to combat an elusive enemy. Most Argentines in the 1970's closed their ears to the screams emanating from more than 200 torture cells, many in residential neighborhoods. An unintended effect was to undermine respect for law. Also, the methods often did not work: Investigators for the Sabato Commission found that much of the evidence obtained by torture was wrong, offered by victims desperate to end the ordeal. Medical investigators elsewhere have found that torture victims often hallucinate. Many human rights activists are urging governments to vote for a United Nations convention that would outlaw all torture and police abuses. But while the convention would likely have moral weight, its practical effects might be limited. The United Nations and regional organizations such as the Organization of African Unity already have human rights committees, but these are often political, rather than human rights, battlegrounds. Countries that are active members of the third world majority (Cuba, for example) are rarely called upon to answer charges of human rights violations in these committees. The most effective weapon against torture has been pressure at home, notably by governments and courts willing to crack down on security forces. Under Brazil's military Government, torture largely ended in the 1970's after pressure by that country's powerful Catholic Church. Public outcries in Britain and finally, complaints by police surgeons, led the British Government in 1979 to dramatically alter its practices of interrogating prisoners in Northern Ireland. Where violations persist, Amnesty said in a report, ''what is lacking is the political will of governments to stop torturing people. It is as simple and as difficult as that.''"
