"The Reagan Administration is not expected to oppose international loans to Chile that are up for consideration this week, despite the crackdown that President Augusto Pinochet imposed on Nov. 6, Administration officials said today. ''We may seek a postponement as we try to sort out the situation,'' one senior official said. Another official, from another department, said Chile was getting a ''hard look'' because of the ''recent deterioration'' in human rights conditions there. Both officials spoke on condition that they remain anonymous. It is considered unlikely, however, that the United States will actively oppose two loans to Chile totaling $160 million coming up Tuesday before the board of the Inter-American Development Bank, a 43-nation group affiliated with the World Bank. In 1977 Congress mandated that American delegates to international lending bodies vote against countries with a consistent pattern of human rights violations. One Loan for Road Project Unlike the Carter Administration, however, the Reagan Administration has yet to oppose a loan to Chile, arguing that its level of human rights violations did not justify negative action. One of the loans up for consideration Tuesday is $35.7 million for a southern road network. The other is for $125 million of municipal development projects, including improved water systems. ''On economic grounds, they look all right,'' an American official said. ''But we're in the process of getting further information.'' An official of the Inter-American Development Bank declared: ''The loans are for the Chilean people, not the individual government. They are for roads used by people and water facilities used by people.'' More than half a dozen members of Congress, led by Representative Michael E. Lowry, a Democrat from Washington, called on the United States to oppose the loans. In a letter to Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan, they said that support of the loans ''will inevitably be seen as complacency in the face of President Pinochet's heightened repression.'' The Treasury is the key agency in determining how the United States delegation votes. Anxiety Expressed by U.S. This country has already expressed anxiety over the Chilean situation. A State Department spokesman, John Hughes, said on Oct. 30 (when General Pinochet first announced consideration of the emergency action) that this was a cause of ''deep concern,'' and he added, ''We're reviewing carefully how recent developments may affect U.S. interests.'' One export credit underwriter, asked about his company's position on Chile, said: ''We're pretty nervous about it. I don't want to hurt Chile, but I'd probably decline risk insurance at this time.'' Chile, with 11 million people, owes $17 billion and is one of the largest debtors in Latin America. Its per capita debt of $1,500 is the highest of any country. In 1983 it borrowed about $500 million from the International Monetary Fund, and monetary officials say it is in compliance with that lending body's austerity requirements. Chile's reserves of hard currency amount to more than $2 billion. Since the Reagan Administration took office in 1981, Chile has received 11 loans from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank totaling $1.2 billion. The latest was a loan of $82.1 million, approved Sept. 26, for a hydroelectric complex."
