"Bringing to justice those who murdered two American advisers on land reform has long been considered a test, particularly in the United States Congress, of El Salvador's determination to end human rights abuses. Last week, the Salvadoran Supreme Court halted all proceedings against Lieut. Isidro Lopez Sibrian, who, according to two men convicted of carrying out the 1981 murders, had issued the orders and furnished the weapons. Salvadoran President Jose Napoleon Duarte, who has set great store by improving his country's human rights record, was presumably embarrassed. The United States was certainly angry. ''We deplore it,'' an official at the American Embassy said. In Washington, the State Department said there was ''no reasonable basis'' for the court's decision, which confirmed lower court rulings. In Salvadoran law, the testimony of convicted murderers cannot be used against another suspect. Besides, the two accusers could not pick Lieutenant Lopez out of a police lineup in 1982 after he dyed his red hair black and shaved off his mustache. An appeals court found nothing wrong with the officer's changing his appearance. President Duarte had other problems last week. At least one right- wing death squad seemed active. A Lutheran minister, the Rev. Ernesto Fernandez Espino, who engaged in relief work for refugees, was shot to death and disfigured with a machete in the eastern part of the country. Further afield, a second meeting with representatives of the rebels is supposed to take place this week but one rebel leader, Hector Oqueli, indicated his side might stay away. He complained that Mr. Duarte was making arrangements for the meeting without consulting the rebels. Others charged that representatives of the Roman Catholic church, who have been acting as intermediaries, had been favoring the Government position. The President played down the importance of the next session by saying he would not attend because it was intended to deal only with procedural questions. Although the rebels indicated a willingness to discuss a cease-fire, or at least a truce for Christmas, Mr. Duarte discounted the possibility of an early halt to hostilities, saying it could come only when the rebels agreed to contribute to ''the democratic process.''"
