"The case of a union official imprisoned in El Salvador without trial since 1980 has become an issue in relations between the United States and El Salvador, according to Administration officials. United States labor leaders and members of Congress have recently pressed President Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador to resolve the case, contending it is a test of his commitment to improve the human rights situation in El Salvador. Many members of Congress voted to increase military and economic aid to El Salvador after Mr. Duarte's election in May, saying, in the words of Representative Clarence D. Long, Democratic of Maryland, that they wanted ''to give him a chance.'' They said Mr. Duarte's pledge to improve the Salvadoran judicial system and to curtail human rights abuses was a key factor in their support of the additional aid. Administration Intervenes  The Reagan Administration, partly in response to the increased interest in the case in Congress, has intervened with Salvadoran judicial authorities to insure that the union official, Hector Recinos Aguirre, has adequate legal representation and that his case and that of nine other union members goes to trial, Administration officials said. Mr. Recinos, the central figure in the case, is director of the National Federation of Salvadoran Workers. He was arrested in 1980 when electrical workers in El Salvador went on strike, blacking out most of the country for 24 hours. The workers, members of the Union of Hydroelectrical Workers of the Lempa River, took part in a nationwide strike called to protest what they said was Government harassment of the union and its members. The Government charged Mr. Recinos and the nine other men with illegal possession of arms and acts of terrorism, saying that the strike was designed to support guerrilla efforts to disrupt the economy. Son Pursues Case in U.S.  Their case is now being championed in the United States by Mr. Recinos's 16-year old son, Hector. He left El Salvador earlier this year with his two younger brothers, Jaime, who is 13, and Luis, who is 7. He said in an interview here that they crossed illegally into California after traveling by foot and bus from Guatemala. The three were arrested by United States Border Patrol agents in Calexico, Calif. They were later released on bond and are living with their aunt in East Los Angeles pending resolution of their case. They have applied for political asylum in the United States. The younger Mr. Recinos said that his mother and sister were abducted from their home in 1982 by 16 armed men dressed in civilian clothing. His mother and sister, who was 13 at the time, have not been heard from since. ''There is no justice in El Salvador,'' he said. ''There are no human rights.'' Kirkland Complains to Duarte  Lane Kirkland, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., complained about the handling of the Recinos case in a letter to Mr. Duarte last month. The letter said, in part, that ''the lack of a trial after such a prolonged imprisonment constitutes a violation of the human rights of the persons involved.'' In August Representative Mel Levine, Democrat of California, and 12 other Democratic members of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, sent a letter about the case to El Salvador's acting Ambassador in Washington, Roberto Jimenez Ortiz. The letter asked the Salvadoran Government to bring the case to trial ''in the interest of human rights and as evidence of its movement toward democracy.'' An aide to Mr. Levine said no response had been received from the embassy. Mr. Recinos and the other men who were arrested have charged that they were tortured. In an affidavit last year, Mr. Recinos said, ''I have experienced blows all over my body, my hands tied up, psychological torture, threats of death, no food for three days and 70 days of confinement in the general garrison of the national guard.'' Torture Charge Denied  Salvadoran authorities have denied the men were tortured and have attributed delays in bringing their case to trial to the defendants' failure to arrange for proper legal representation. Last month, according to State Department officials, the United States Ambassador to El Salvador, Thomas R. Pickering, asked embassy officials to help make sure that a defense lawyer was properly registered with the court so the case could proceed. The officials said they hoped the case would go to trial later this year. Department officials said that the electrical blackout caused by the 1980 strike created widespread hostility in the country and that popular support for Mr. Recinos in El Salvador is limited."
