"Arbitrary arrests and systematic torture have increased dramatically in Chile in the last two months, according to an Amnesty International report issued here today. Spokesmen for the private human-rights group said that since July 15 more than 1,000 and possibly as many as 2,000 people have been rounded up by the Chilean secret police. Detailed reports coming out of Chile confirmed a pattern of systematic torture, including severe beatings, near drownings, prolonged administration of electric shocks and burning with cigarettes, to which most detainees were subjected. Many others, Amnesty International said, have not been heard from since their arrests. The report spoke of doctors overseeing the torture. Saying it had several dozen detailed accounts by torture victims, the organization cited the case of a 25-year-old university student, Angelica Diaz Tapia of Santiago, who was seized from a restaurant by a dozen men. She later testified to having been stripped and tied to a metal grid and given electric shocks, gradually concentrated on the most sensitive parts of her body. She said the torture was applied repeatedly between interrogation sessions until she fainted and was revived after each shock. She also said she was burned with cigarettes, beaten and threatened, the report said. An Amnesty International source said that although the reports of torture have not ceased since the 1973 coup that brought President Augusto Pinochet to power, there has been a dramatic increase in the number of those arrested and tortured since the July 15 assassination of Lieut. Col. Roger Vergara Campos, the director of the army intelligence school. There was a surge in July, then a bigger surge in August, the source said. The report was made public in the midst of what is becoming a major dispute between the British wing of Amnesty International and the Government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher over the Government's recent decision to end a five-year embargo on arms sales to Chile.  The embargo was brought about partly by the revelation that a British physician, Dr. Sheila Cassidy, was held and tortured in a Chilean jail in 1975. The British wing of the rights group has charged that the Government lifted the embargo July 22 though it knew that another Briton, a student with dual Chilean-British citizenship, was arrested and tortured by the Chilean police on July 16. The Foreign Office said today that Britain had expressed its deep concern to Chile over the incident but had no intention of reimposing the embargo."
