"Former President Jimmy Carter, on a tour of Latin America, has been received warmly by civilian politicians who credit him with having reduced human rights violations and hastened the end of some military dictatorships. ''Millions of Brazilians are delighted that Jimmy Carter should come here so that they can publicly express their immense gratitude for everything he did,'' Leonel Brizola, the Governor of Rio de Janeiro state, said today. Mr. Carter flew here from Lima, Peru, where he was given a similar welcome by President Fernando Belaunde Terry, who in 1980 won Peru's first free election since 1968. Today Mr. Carter left for Argentina, where a civilian administration succeeded a repressive military Government 10 months ago. Mr. Carter said it was gratifying to see the progress achieved in human rights. ''I don't think the American people understood or have yet understood the profound impact of our human rights policy around the world,'' he said. The change of mood - and the change of attitudes toward Mr. Carter - was particularly evident in Brazil. When he visited Brazil in March 1978, he was received coldly by a military Government headed by Gen. Ernesto Geisel that viewed his rights policy as interference in internal affairs. When Mr. Carter ran for re-election in 1980, one of the criticisms aimed at his rights policy by such Reagan campaigners as Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, now the delegate to the United Nations, was that it had reduced American relations with Brazil to a low point. But both General Geisel and his successor, Gen. Joao Baptista Figueiredo, hastened Brazil's return to civilian rule. And on this visit, Mr. Carter met not only with President Figueiredo, but also with Paulo Salim Maluf of the pro-Government party and Tancredo Neves of the opposition alliance, the two civilians competing to assume the Presidency next March. ''Now Brazil has a total absence of persecution and a totally free press,'' Mr. Carter said today. ''Brazil is setting a wonderful example to the rest of the continent.'' On Saturday, he also met with Paulo Evaristo Cardinal Arns, Archbishop of Sao Paulo, a defender of human rights whom Mr. Carter was forced to meet in secret during his 1978 visit. Mr. Carter came to Brazil to address a convention of the Friendship Force, a people-to-people exchange program that he initiated in 1977. But, recalling that he had a longstanding interest in Latin America, he said that he was eager to study recent political developments in the region. Mr. Carter charged President Reagan with trying ''to refute our nation's commitments'' to human rights. ''The first major trip by Jeane Kirkpatrick was to Chile and Argentina to meet their dictators,'' he said. ''This sent a clear signal that the human rights policy had been abandoned. But the hunger for human rights is strong. The fact of the reversal in the White House won't stop it. You can't undo what's being done in Argentina, Peru, Brazil and other countries.''"
