"BOSTON This was going to be a column, the second in a series, about Ronald Reagan's remoteness from the hard work of the Presidency. Instead it will deal with the man who might well replace a re-elected Reagan. The debate between George Bush and Geraldine Ferraro was mostly treated by analysts in score-card terms: Who won? I thought the event was fascinating for what it showed about Mr. Bush. Seldom has the character of a politician been put in such a pitiless light - put there by himself. One revealing moment was the Vice President's discussion of human rights in Nicaragua and El Salvador. The difference between them, he said, was like ''night and day.'' Nicaragua did not have ''any human rights at all.'' It humiliated the Roman Catholic Church and censored the press. ''One country is devoid of human rights. The other is struggling to perfect their democracy.'' In El Salvador over the last five years 42,000 civilians have been murdered by right-wing death squads or Government security forces, many after horrible torture, and another 3,000 have disappeared. In Nicaragua in the same period around 200 people have been murdered or kidnapped by Government forces. The church? Yes, the Sandinistas have put pressure on it, and behaved nastily when the Pope visited. In El Salvador the Archbishop was murdered in his cathedral. The press? Yes, the Nicaraguan Government censors the one opposition paper, La Prensa. In El Salvador there are no opposition papers. One of two, La Cronica, closed after its editor was kidnapped and his macheted body was found. The other, El Independiente, closed after Government security forces raided the publisher's home and office and he fled to Mexico. Was George Bush ignorant of all that when he spoke as he did? Or was his show of indignant sincerity just a show? Which is worse? Then there was the question about the Vice President's reported statement that nuclear war is ''winnable.'' His answer was: ''I was quoted wrong, obviously.'' The quote, a detailed argument for the winnability of nuclear war, appeared in a 1980 Bush interview with Robert Scheer of The Los Angeles Times. It attracted much comment then and after. Is it conceivable that Mr. Bush would not have objected earlier if it was wrong? He went on to say that Soviet military planners do base their thinking on the ''ugly concept'' of a winnable nuclear war. But that scary notion has little support among serious analysts of Soviet policy; in recent years official Soviet statements have repeatedly called nuclear war suicidal. Did Mr. Bush take the contrary line because he is so rigidly anti-Communist in ideology, or was he just trying to please others who are? His political aims in the debate were plain. He wanted to look conservative, strong and loyal to his President. He achieved all of them: overachieved, some might think. A man who once favored Federal financing of abortions now spoke fervently for the Reagan constitutional amendment against abortion. A man once suspected of moderation said the United States was justified in supporting terrorism against a foreign government if it did not ''believe in all of the values that we believe in.'' Jesse Helms could not have faulted him. Mr. Bush's voice was strident, and he used the words ''strong'' and ''strength'' a lot. That may have been effective television, but I wonder whether it projected internal confidence. A man who knew who he was would not feel it necessary, in order to look tough, to strike the mucker pose the next day and tell a longshoremen's union leader, ''We tried to kick a little ass last night.'' As for his attitude toward Mr. Reagan, it was worshipful to the point of patronization. Blame for Beirut? ''The President, of course, is the best I've ever seen at accepting that.'' The arms control discussion with Andrei Gromyko? ''I wish everybody could have seen that one - the President giving the facts to Gromyko . . . - excellent, right on top of that subject matter.'' Anyone who doubts that the extreme right has taken over the Republican Party should play a tape of those 90 minutes. George Bush's performance was a testimonial to the change, and a revelation of the price it can exact. When he blandly said Mrs. Ferraro and Walter Mondale suggested that the marines in Beirut had ''died in shame,'' it could have been Joe McCarthy speaking: McCarthy in white shoes.B"
