"Military and police sources say they have adopted a more sytematic and severe counterinsurgency strategy against leftist guerrillas in this Andean region. They say their strategy involves military and psychological tactics and includes the use of terror as a dissuasive method, stepped up formation of peasant militia forces to create grass-roots resistance to the guerrillas and control of information and the spreading of false reports, known in intelligence circles as disinformation. But Peruvian judicial and church sources say the armed forces and the police are increasingly resorting to kidnappings, torture and summary executions of civilians in their fight against the guerrillas, members of the Shining Path movement, who have said they are struggling to impose a Chinese- style political system in Peru. In a recent interview President Fernando Belaunde Terry denied reports of growing human rights violations, including executions, by the police and military. He said these charges came from ''ingenuous institutions'' that serve as ''useful idiots'' for the guerrillas. The army chief, Gen. Julian Julia, said last week that there was a campaign under way to discredit the army.  The judicial and church sources said the official violence has become worse since mid-July, when the Government gave the armed forces unlimited control over 13 provinces in the emergency zone. In this secret war, in which both the guerrillas and the security forces are often reported to kill civilians, people concerned with human rights say it is difficult to monitor who is to blame for the death toll, reported as close to 2,700 in 1983. Killings often happen in communities inaccessible by road and with only rare contact with larger towns. But in the last two months more than 100 bodies have been found around Ayacucho and Huanta, and church, local police and judiciary sources have blamed security forces for the deaths. In many cases, relatives have said the victims were pulled out of their homes or picked up by uniformed soldiers using official vehicles.  The bodies, many of them showing signs of severe torture and mutilation, are left in the fields, in gullies or by the roadside. A counterinsurgency expert who insisted on remaining anonymous said the security forces had a double purpose in leaving bodies on public display. ''This raises doubt about who did it and intimidates and dissuades people,'' he said. ''The idea is to reduce the terrorists to their hard core by using greater terror.'' According to the military and police sources, the strategy is already being applied in these harsh central highlands, east of the capital, that for centuries have been inhabited by Quechua- speaking indians. The Shining Path guerrillas have also been blamed for many of the deaths in the area. Since they announced their campaign of violence, modeled on the Chinese revolution, four years ago, they reportedly have killed 122 police officers and an undetermined number of civilians they regarded as informants or ''exploiters.'' While they are believed to have considerable support among the impoverished Indians, who have long resented the dominant Hispanic culture and reported abuse by the police, the guerrillas have also reportedly forced people to join them and have executed ''traitors.'' Other leftist groups have condemned the guerrilla campaign as madness. Peasant Leader Found Dead The Government, apparently taking advantage of Shining Path's violent image, has accused the guerrillas of most killings in the region. But this effort is complicated by continuing reports that people are found dead after arrest and that soldiers using trucks or helicopters have abducted people. Last week the tortured body of Jesus Oropesa, the well-known leader of a national peasant union, was found 10 days after the police arrested him in Puquio. In the towns of Ayacucho and Huanta, anxious relatives looking for missing family members appear at all hours outside the offices of the local lawyers, the mayor, the police and the district attorney. Antonia Huana of Huanta said her husband disappeared late last year. She clutched his membership card in the ruling Popular Action Party, saying she hoped this would help prove that he was still alive. Prudencia Cerpa said she had come to denounce the deaths of her son and daughter. Sobbing, she said in broken Spanish that soldiers took them away with eight other people from a farm at Iribamba on July 24. ''They came in a tanqueta,'' she said, using the local word for armored personnel carrier. One week later, she said, her children were found ''in a big grave with 16 bodies.'' Like many other people in her village, she said she had fled her home. Pointing at her oldest grandson, the 75- year-old woman cried: ''What will I do now? I am left alone with 10 grandchildren.'' Stories of Violence Told Stories of recent violent killings were repeated last week on a tour of other villages on the beautiful mountain slopes behind Ayacucho. At Quinua, a group of potters' colonial adobe homes set on a magnificent high plateau, people said three truckloads of soldiers, their faces covered with ski masks, arrived at 5 A.M. on July 15. Local civil guardsmen told reporters that they had come out of their post on the main square but were ordered to stay inside. The villagers said the soldiers had burst into many homes, lined people up in the main square and finally left with 12 people, who had been pointed out by two men wearing hoods. Wilma Limaco said they had taken her sister Dina, 20, and brother Teofilo, 21. The next day the 12 bodies were found in a gully nearby, with signs of torture and bulletholes and pieces of cactus in their mouths. Below Quinua, at Atojpamba, Maria Berrocal pointed to a place behind her home where she said soldiers had shot her grandson, Alfredo Garcia, and a friend, Marcelino Chavez. She said the soldiers had smashed her belongings and ''left the bodies with their eyes cut out.'' That day, July 15, lawyers in Ayacucho said, more than 60 people were killed. 'No One Investigates' At the Ayacucho office of the District Attorney, the Government body responsible for investigating violent deaths, an official who asked not to be named said, ''The Government and the press simply blame the terrorists for all the deaths.'' ''We know different,'' the official said, ''but no one investigates. If you do, you may also end up dead along the road.''"
