"The Reagan Administration has spent more than $1 billion to prop up the Salvadoran Government and $150 million to overthrow the Sandinistas in Nicaragua. A comparison of the human rights records of both countries raises serious questions about this choice of friends and enemies. One does not have to - indeed, one should not - defend the anti-democratic practices of the Sandinistas to recognize that there has been more freedom and less brutality in revolutionary Nicaragua than under any recent United States-backed government in El Salvador. ''I don't understand how they call that Government Communist, and say that this Government is Christian and democratic,'' a senior Salvadoran bishop once said, comparing Nicaragua with El Salvador. In Nicaragua, he noted, ''they don't shoot priests and workers, do they?'' A Catholic leader in the United States, the Rev. R.J. Henle, former president of Georgetown University, has also suggested comparing the human rights records of El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua. Do so, he said, and ''the record of Nicaragua would stand out as a remarkably clean record.'' The Sandinistas have indeed censored the opposition newspaper, La Prensa - censorship that cannot be justified solely on the basis of the country's being under attack. But in El Salvador, there is no opposition press to censor. Opposition journalists have been murdered, their newspaper facilities bombed into silence. The editor-in-chief and a photographer for La Cronica, were seized midday in a downtown coffee shop. Their bodies, hacked by machetes, were found a few days later. El Independiente closed after repeated bombings of its offices and assassination attempts on the publisher.  In Nicaragua, the Government has harassed some church leaders, including Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo, and the Sandinistas recently expelled 10 foreign priests on charges of antigovernment activity. Such interference with the church is pernicious and probably self-defeating. Nevertheless, the fate of clergy who have challenged the Sandinistas has been far better than that of their brethren in El Salvador, where soldiers and death squads have murdered at least 16 priests and nuns, including Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero.  In Nicaragua, there are no death squads. Mutilated, decapitated bodies do not show up on dusty roads and garbage dumps, as they have in El Salvador. A State Department human rights report has charged the Sandinistas with the deaths of 12 people in 1983. There were also 31 disappearances that year, according to Nicaragua's independent human rights commission. By contrast in El Salvador, each month during 1983 an average of 140 people were killed by military or paramilitary units and 39 people disappeared, according to the State Department's figures, which are lower than those of many human rights groups.  In Nicaragua, the activities of political leaders have been restricted. In El Salvador, opposition politicians have been tortured and murdered. A prominent leader of the Nicaraguan opposition, Arturo Cruz, former Ambassador to Washington, has returned to Nicaragua and held mass campaign rallies - something that his counterpart in El Salvador, Guillermo Ungo, could never hope to do. United States diplomats in El Salvador knew it wouldn't be safe for Mr. Ungo or any other opposition politician to return for the elections: the embassy suggested they campaign from abroad using videotapes. Probably the most deplorable aspect of the Sandinistas' human rights performance has been the treatment of the Miskito Indians. (That treatment has not, however, been nearly as horrendous as the Reagan Administration claims, and according to the human rights group, Americas Watch, there has been ''important improvement'' in the Sandinistas' relations with the Miskitos.) The Sandinistas have relocated Miskitos from areas where counterrevolutionary fighters are operating. But in El Salvador, according to Americas Watch, thousands of civilians have been killed in ''indiscriminate'' bombings, artillery shellings and ground sweeps as part of a ''deliberate policy'' to force civilians to leave areas of guerrilla activity. In Nicaragua, human rights abuses by soldiers have been punished. As the result of one investigation, and the appointment of a special prosecutor, for example, 13 individuals, including the commander of a security force unit, were sentenced for up to 17 years for murder, torture, rape and robbery. That doesn't happen in El Salvador. Some 40,000 civilians have been killed there in the past four years. Women have been raped. Villages have been plundered. Yet not one death squad member, not one officer who has carried out the massacres of peasants, not one soldier - with the exception of the national guardsmen who killed four American churchwomen and a civil defense guard - has been convicted and sentenced for a human rights crime. President Reagan has excoriated Nicaragua as a ''totalitarian dungeon.'' What does that make El Salvador?"
