"El Salvador's army high command has ordered a full investigation into an alleged massacre of 68 peasants last month by a United States- trained army unit, military officials said. They said the investigation, believed to be the first such military investigation, was ordered yesterday by Defense Minister Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova after he read a report by the Catholic church's human rights monitoring arm, Tutela Legal. The church group investigated reports of a mass killing in northern Cabanas Province and said troops of the elite United States -trained Atlacatl Battalion shot 68 peasants to death in a ''search and destroy operation'' between July 18 and 22 in three villages some 25 miles north of the capital. Inquiry Started by Duarte  Military officials said the army investigation was initiated at the request of President Jose Napoleon Duarte, who has said he first learned of the incident at a press conference on Saturday. They said the inquiry would be led by Col. Joel Rivas, administrative assistant to the defense minister. Western diplomats said they welcomed the investigation, a rare event in the country, but added that military inquiries into lesser abuses of authority in the past had seldom produced results.  Last week, a Defense Ministry spokesman said the army had looked into reports of bombings against the civilian population in Cabanas and found they were ''negative.'' He said the accusations of an army attack against civilians were a ''propaganda campaign against the armed forces.'' Previous Massacre Reports Human rights groups say the Atlacatl Battalion has been responsible for a string of massacres of peasants, most notably the killing of some 500 peasants in the village of El Mozote in northeastern Morazan Province in late 1981. There was no army investigation of the Mozote incident. The probe into the Cabanas massacre reports comes less than two days after Mr. Duarte announced the formation of a special commission to investigate a number of killings in the last four years, including another reported army massacre in western El Salvador."
