"President Fernando Belaunde Terry says he is pessimistic that the Peruvian Army will be able to make much headway in its new drive against leftist guerrillas in the Andean highlands. Mr. Belaunde Terry, who in 1980 became Peru's first elected civilian leader after 12 years of military rule, put the armed forces in control of the counterinsurgency campaign last month. It is now under way in 13 provinces. The President said he made the move because violence by the Shining Path, a left-wing guerrilla group, had reached alarming proportions, and that the police were no longer able to cope with it. But he said the decision to bring in the military had not been easy. 'Without Great Expectation' ''I reflected a great deal before calling in the armed forces,'' the President said in an interview Thursday. ''I have done this at the opportune moment, but without having great expectation. Terrorism does not have a battlefront.'' Terrorist attacks by the guerrillas and the responses by the army and the police have resulted in more than 500 deaths so far this year. Mr. Belaunde Terry denied reports that over the last two years, the army and the police had killed innocent civilians in their fight against the guerrillas, and that they have recently been taking fewer prisoners. The guerrillas are also reported frequently to kill civilians. Some Peruvians who are concerned about human rights abuses have said the Government should instead undertake a political offensive to win over the guerrillas and their supporters. The President said he has been forced to fight a military war because the rebels ''are bandits and delinquents who use women and children and do not identify themselves.'' Mr. Belaunde Terry's efforts to combat the rebels have raised questions in Peru about whether the Government can defend itself against the rebels without destroying democracy. In particular, there has been criticism of Mr. Belaunde Terry's buildup of the military, which recently made purchases of bought equipment unrelated to the campaign against the guerrillas. One Government official said that the armed forces had agreed to take full control and responsibility for the counterinsurgency campaign only after the President made ''important budgetary concessions.'' Close to one-third of Peru's national budget currently goes to military spending, which also accounts for more than one-third of Peru's foreign debt. According to Manuel Ulloa, the president of the Peruvian Senate, the Government has created a military establishment, including a fleet and air force that ''is very disproportionate to our economic possibilities and real needs.'' Mr. Belaunde Terry defended the continuing purchases of military equipment, including fighter planes and tanks that are not required for the military's present drive against the guerrillas. ''Military equipment becomes obsolete very quickly,'' he said. ''The country that does not guarantee its defense is condemned to being invaded.'' Shopping for Helicopters For the current anti-insurgency drive, Peru is shopping for new helicopters, having already bought six United States-made Bell helicopters equipped with machine guns. Mr. Belaunde Terry, who was overthrown by the military in 1968 before ending his first term of office, is believed to feel he had little choice but to accede to the miltary's demands for new equipment. One aide of Mr. Belaunde Terry said the President's anguish to a large extent stems ''from the fact that he feels caught between the military on the one hand and the terrorists on the other.'' The President declined to discuss in detail a new agreement with the Soviet Union to provide spare parts and military equipment, including new turbines for transport and fighter planes. He said only that Peru's financial agreement with the Soviet Union ''has been very original because we are paying our debt with manufactured products, especially textiles.'' Behind on Payments to France Peru also is behind on its payments for an order placed in 1982 of for 26 French Mirage planes. Authorities said that two months ago, Peru negotiated more than $350 million worth of payments for 16 of the Mirage planes and has apparently canceled the order for the remaining 10. Mr. Belaunde Terry, now in his fifth and last year of office, has been plagued by an economic crisis described here as the worst in Peru's modern history, and the guerrilla movement. Some officials say it has the guerrillas have spread faster and into a wider area than the Government has been willing to admit. Friends of Mr. Belaunde Terry, who is an architect and developer by profession, said he has been deeply tormented by the rebels' actions. ''When they blow up pylons, bridges and buildings, he is outraged,'' one friend said. ''He takes it personally.'' When Mr. Belaunde Terry took office in 1980, his Government set out to rebuild the economy, stabilize democracy, fight the drug traffic, clean up corruption and improve the nation's judicial system. Critics of the President of both left and right say his measures have been too few and too late. Corruption Said to Worsen While political and press freedoms have been maintained without restrictions - the President returned confiscated newspapers, television and radio stations to their past owners - Government and police corruption is widely said to have worsened, partly a result of wealthy and powerful traffickers in cocaine. But police abuse and extortion of detainees, lawyers said, remains standard practice and, according to officials, less than one-fifth of the nation's prison population has been tried. As a result of heavy public spending, inflation rose to 125 percent last year while the foreign debt is now over $12 billion. The Government also has not paid more than $80 million in interest to foreign commerical banks and governments that was due in June. During the interview, the President hinted that he would not be willing to accept new austerity measures likely to be demanded by the International Monetary Fund. The I.M.F. is to review its agreement with Peru in the coming weeks. Rules Out Devaluation The President said he would not consider any major devaluation of the currency or further budget cuts. ''The budget is basically salaries and services that we cannot cut,'' Mr. Belaunde Terry said. ''If we reduce this, the state stops being an employer and the country paralyzes.'' During the 45-minute interview in his office, the 71-year-old leader appeared defensive, repeatedly brushing aside questions about the nation's problems. Instead, Mr. Belaunde Terry sought to stress what he considered his achievements, which he said included expansion of housing, roads, education and the telephone system. At one point, the President read from a recent speech he delivered on the state of the nation and handed over a poster listing public works projects he has dedicated. The night before, guerrillas had attacked a section of Lima's public works system, dynamiting power pylons and blacking out the capital for more than hour. Because of the guerrillas, the President said, ''now I am having to put away my development maps and pull out military charts.''"
