"The new director of El Salvador's Treasury Police has conceded that some members of the unit were responsible for serious violations of human rights. But he pledged the abuses would not continue under his command. The director, Col. Rinaldo Golcher, said in an interview this week that a recent decision to disband the treasury police's intelligence squad, known as S-2, had been made because he and President Jose Napoleon Duarte believed the unit had carried out political murders and other human rights abuses. ''It was a camp inside the camp,'' Colonel Golcher said. ''Even the other soldiers here feared it.'' ''In my first interview with the president,'' he went on, ''we came to the conclusion that the first logical thing to do would be to dissolve the S-2 section.'' 40,000 Civilians Killed The action was the strongest indication so far of Mr. Duarte's commitment to ending army and police participation in right-wing death squads that have killed a majority of the more than 40,000 civilian victims in four-and- a-half years of civil war. In what appears to be a concerted publicity campaign, senior Salvadoran Army officers made statements throughout the week that they were determined to end human rights abuses by the military. The message was reinforced when President Duarte attended the treasury police's 50th anniversary celebration last Wednesday. Condemns Extremists In a keynote speech, Colonel Golcher condemned both the ''extreme right and the extreme left'' and spoke of the peace that would come when ''there are no guerrillas and no death squads.'' During the reception that followed, Mr. Duarte spoke with virtually the entire army high command, including the Defense Minister, Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova, and the chiefs of police. It was a demonstration of how Mr. Duarte's relations with the army have improved since the day in 1972 when he was beaten by soldiers and exiled for seven years to deny him a victory in that year's presidential election. Jorge Camacho, the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and the country's chief peasant leader, was also at the treasury police reception. Mr. Camacho, who has received several death threats and whose house was bombed last year, was told by Colonel Golcher that ''things have changed.'' General Casanova seconded the message. 'Image Is Worth Millions' ''We know that improving our image is worth millions of dollars of aid for the country,'' the Defense Minister said. Many here say it is still too early to judge how the desire to improve the image of the security forces will be put into practice. Senior Salvadoran officers continue to maintain that no army officer has been involved in death squad killings, leaving the impression that a serious investigation into allegations of past abuses by officers is unlikely. But important changes have come to the treasury police. The force has long held the street- level reputation as the most ruthless and brutal of El Salvador's security forces. U.S. Asked Action on Force United States diplomats have referred to the treasury police as the ''Gestapo'' and repeatedly asked Salvadoran officials to either reorganize or disband the force. But they have also acknowledged that the special unit has been one of the most effective in detecting and destroying urban guerrilla cells. Colonel Golcher, a Salvadoran Army officer with a reputation for moderate views, was chosen to clean up the treasury police, according to a Western official here. The new commander's description of the 2,000-member unit illustrated how military and police duties are intertwined in the Salvadoran security forces and how special squads have been used in recent years for political killing. Colonel Golcher said he found that the S-2 intelligence squad, which was officially mandated to have 30 members, in fact had almost 110 men working for it. He said they wore civilian clothes and not only collected intelligence but ''acted on it.'' ''When they wanted to do an operation, they would take some of the uniformed police along, or bring them into the unit to work on intelligence,'' Colonel Golcher said, indicating that the unit was a power unto itself that carried out death squad killings. Ordered Squad Dispersed He said he was unable to prove specific crimes against any one member of S-2, so he ordered all of them to be dispersed to combat posts around the country. There were three officers in the unit who commanded more than 100 enlisted men, he said. Before he acted, Colonel Golcher said he called all the treasury police staff together to reassure them about their futures in the security forces. ''Their biggest worry was the rumor that with Duarte the treasury police would disappear,'' he said. ''It was a logical thing that they should have this worry.'' The new commander then broke the news to the members of S-2 that they alone would be disbanded. ''It was a surprise to them,'' he said. ''The reaction at first was bad feeling. But I told them that for the benefit of the entire armed forces, they had to go.'' New Police Group Formed Colonel Golcher said he would replace the former S-2 unit with a new group of policemen who are being trained by the Salvadoran National Police in intelligence work. He said the new unit would have about 40 members and should be operating within six months. He added that he would have liked United States help in training the new men, but that aiding foreign police forces was prohibited under American law. The treasury police will no longer be involved in political work, he said, concentrating instead on stopping smuggling and illegal distillation of alcohol. Political intelligence analysis will be taken over by other police forces, he added. The treasury police force will include a 350-man battalion that will be trained to fight with regular army units against guerrilla units, the colonel said. The creation of the new battalion is an example of the hazy line between police and army forces here. Salvador's three main police forces are commanded by regular army officers and often take part in army operations. Colonel Golcher said he was working for a ''change of mentality'' in his new command. But he also conceded it would take time and he would make enemies in the process. ''My position is worse,'' he said. ''I'm caught between the left and the right.'' The former director of the treasury police, Col. Nicolas Carranza, resigned the post and is now awaiting transfer to an assignment abroad as a military attache in a Salvadoran embassy. Colonel Carranza was one of a small group of army officers with close ties to extreme right-wing politicians who have been transferred to new assignments with Mr. Duarte's victory in presidential elections last month. In March Colonel Carranza was linked to the Central Intelligence Agency in published reports quoting American officials as saying that he had received $90,000 a year for the last five or six years for work as an informant. The colonel denied he had received any money from the C.I.A. and also denied he had had any relations with the organization. The head of the treasury police before Colonel Carranza, Col. Francisco Moran, was also tied to extreme right- wing groups. Two of Colonel Moran's bodyguards are under arrest for involvement in a recent kidnapping and killing of a Salvadoran businessman, according to a senior army officer. One of the bodyguards is a member of the treasury police. The other is a former member."
