"El Salvador's three security forces, long linked with the worst human rights abuses, are being streamlined and restructured, according to military and Government officials. In the most dramatic demonstration of these changes, the Government has disbanded the 100-man intelligence unit of the treasury police, which American officials said earlier this year had been providing information to right-wing death squads. ''The idea is to improve the image that the security forces have, especially in relation to civilians,'' said Lieut. Col. Rinaldo Golcher, the director of the treasury police. ''Instead of being afraid to go to an agent, civilians will feel confident in going to them.'' The restructuring is part of an overall plan of the newly elected President, Jose Napeleon Duarte, to ''provide a climate of security'' and to bring the security forces under the control of the Government, according to Julio Rey Prendes, the President's top aide. 'Climate of Security' Is Aim Mr. Rey Prendes said ''small armies'' directed by the far-right and ''armed to the teeth'' had been protecting Government institutions. In the future, he said, the security for state agencies would be provided and controlled by Col. Reynaldo Lopez Nuila, the Deputy Minister of Defense in charge of security. Mr. Rey Prendes said the new Government would not begin a dialogue with the leftist insurgents until it had created a ''climate of security'' in El Salvador and had the support of all the country's political groups. President Duarte, he said, plans to appoint a political commission, with representatives of all political parties, to take up the question of how the country should approach discussions with the rebels. If the right is not involved in the decision, he said, it could ''provoke problems.'' But Mr. Rey Prendes stressed that the new Government would resolve the problem of institutional human rights abuses before going forward with any dialogue with the rebels. The country's three security forces - the treasury police, national guard and national police - have been the focus of concerns from many quarters, including the United States, about human rights abuses. Earlier this year, the American Embassy accused the treasury police of using force to make a suspect confess to murdering an American adviser. The re-organization of the three forces, which have a total of 11,000 men, will take place over the next six months. To make way for the changes, the Government appointed political moderates to command the national police and the treasury police and created the post of a second Deputy Minister of Defense in charge of the security forces. Previously, the security forces were nearly autonomous groups, often commanded by right-wing officers. New Unit Planned Eventually, officials said, only one of the three security forces will be represented in each town. At present, two or three are based in a town, making it difficult to determine who is responsible for security as well as human rights abuses.  ''The idea is that there is one person who is responsible,'' Mr. Rey Prendes said. Other changes will be made by the new commanders, officials said. Colonel Golcher said that he will ask for American assistance in training a new 30-man intelligence unit that will be in charge of investigations but will not make arrests. ''Only uniformed police will make arrests,'' he said. In the past, treasury policemen made arrests dressed in civilian clothes. Often the arrests were not reported for several weeks. The former investigation unit, Colobel Golcher said, had been disbanded because of ''some accusations'' against it and to improve the image of the treasury police. Another high ranking military official called the disbandment of the group a ''purge'' to put in ''people who have the right ideology.''"
