"A Plot to Kill U.S. Envoy In El Salvador Few people realized until last week the extent of rightist resentment over the defeat of Roberto d'Aubuisson by Jose Napoleon Duarte, the Christian Democratic moderate, in El Salvador's presidential election. But now an Administration official in Washington and two sources in El Salvador have said that American intelligence uncovered a plot last month by Mr. d'Aubuisson's political associates against the life of United States Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering shortly after Mr. Duarte's victory. Mr. d'Aubuisson's personal role was unclear. The sources said the d'Aubuisson group was enraged by revelations that the C.I.A. had helped the Christian Democrats. A demand by Senator Jesse Helms, the conservative Republican from North Carolina, for Mr. Pickering's recall reportedly fueled the anger in Mr. d'Aubuisson's party, the National Republican Alliance. Mr. Helms, a supporter of Mr. d'Aubuisson, called the plot story ''an absolute falsehood,'' although he was reported to have apologized to President Reagan for problems he might have caused by his public complaints about the Ambassador. Washington was said to have dispatched a veteran trouble shooter, Gen. Vernon Walters, a former deputy director of the C.I.A., to warn Mr. d'Aubuisson of ''serious consequences'' if the plot went through. For unclear reasons, the State Department offered Mr. d'Aubuisson a visa to the United State and he was said to have used it. Since his election, Mr. Duarte has been moving cautiously to remove some of the right wing's teeth and create a proper atmosphere for the dialogue he has promised with the leftist rebels. One measure has been to shake up the country's most feared force, the Treasury Police. Last week, Col. Rinaldo Golcher, its new head, confirmed the worst suspicions of human rights advocates: The 2,000-man force, in particular its intelligence unit known as S-2, had indeed been committing political murders and other abuses. S-2, which the colonel described as ''a camp within a camp,'' has been abolished to meet Mr. Duarte's promise to end the right-wing death squads. Critics of El Salvador's human rights record were also somewhat mollified by the 30-year prison sentences meted out last week to five former members of the Salvadoran National Guard for the murder of four American churchwomen in 1980. The question of who ordered the murders remained, however, as did another unresolved case. The American Embassy in San Salvador said that it would now push for prosecution of those responsible for the killing in 1981 of two American advisers on land reform."
