"The President-elect of El Salvador plans to separate the command of the regular army and the country's three security forces, according to Salvdoran officials. President-elect Jose Napoleon Duarte, who will be sworn in Friday, wants to make the move to bring the security forces more directly under his control, the officials said. In addition, they said, Mr. Duarte will have a special investigation unit that will come under the command of the presidency to look into human rights abuses in the military. The force, which will eventually number more than 20, is being trained by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The three security forces have long been at the center of American concerns about death squad activities in the armed forces. In the last six months, the intelligence directors of two of the forces and their commanders have been transferred to other positions. Effort to Control Forces The security forces have operated as nearly autonomous organizations. However, there has recently been an effort to bring them under closer control. The new directors are known as political conservatives without ties to the far right. The 10,000-member security forces will be under the command of Col. Reynaldo Lopez Nuila, who now directs the National Police, the officials said. They said the colonel would be a Deputy Minister of Defense in charge of the security forces. The colonel, who is also a lawyer, won recognition last month when he negotiated the safe release of 73 hostages being held in a discount supermarket by leftist insurgents. Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova will remain as Minister of Defense and command the 29,000-member regular army, the officials said. They said that the current Deputy Minister of Defense and the chief of staff have also been asked to stay on. Posts Divided Between Parties The officials said other Cabinet posts would be divided between Christian Democrats and the Democratic Action Party, which signed a pact with the new President last month. Julio Rey Prendes, Mr. Duarte's campaign manager and the leader of the Christian Democrats in Parliament, will be Minister of the Presidency, generally the President's closest Cabinet adviser.  Other powerful Cabinent members include Dr. Jorge Eduardo Tenorio, who will be Foreign Minister.  Fidel Chavez Mena, Foreign Minister will move to the Planning Ministry.  Ricardo Gonzales Camacho, a member of the Democratic Action Party, who wrote much of the new Constitution, will be the Minister of Economy. As expected, there are no representatives from the far-right Nationalist Republican Alliance, known as Arena. The 10 directors of Arena were scheduled to meet this evening to decide whether to attend Mr. Duarte's inauguration. Roberto d'Aubuisson, the far-right presidential candidate, visited Provisional President Alvaro Magana on Monday afternoon to discuss the boycott proposal."
