"Reagan's attacks on Nicaragua have jumped in decibels but slumped in credibility. Shrill is the word for the effort to pressure Congress into resuming aid to the ''contra'' insurgency: ''The Nicaraguan people are trapped in a totalitarian dungeon, trapped by a military dictatorship that oppresses, impoverishes them, while its rulers live in privileged and protected luxury and openly boast their revolution will spread to Nicaragua's neighbors as well.'' This is overdrawn and comes with ill grace from an Administration that minimized its own findings of worse conditions in El Salvador. Mr. Reagan has reason to deplore Nicaragua's scheduled election as a ''sham'' - the leftist Sandinista regime will not really risk eviction. But the President would be better advised to throw his weight behind the political reforms he'd like to see. The case for more measured criticism was best made by the State Department's 1983 report on human rights conditions. It found that Nicaragua's security forces caused the deaths of 12 persons in that year, records 102 instances of torture and 167 mysterious disappearances and recounts the flight of 1,200 from the persecution of Miskito Indians. In El Salvador, the same report counted 140 persons killed by death squads every month, and 39 others disappearing each month. A possibly major change, of course, occurred in El Salvador this year, with the election of President Jose Napoleon Duarte. But it was not only the fear of losing that caused insurgent politicians to boycott the campaign; some had good reason to fear for their lives if they tried to run for office.  Still, President Duarte ran a greater risk of defeat at the polls than the Sandinistas intend to run in Nicaragua. Their claim to be organizing that country's first free election is nonsense. They seek only ratification of a five-year-old dictatorship.  The Sandinistas have resisted giving the necessary guarantees that would allow an election challenge by Arturo Cruz, who broke with them to protest the loss of political rights. He rightly asks for access to the state-controlled media and an end of the 28-month state of emergency.  But the Sandinistas have found it all too easy to blame the emergency on the American-sponsored war against them. Instead of answering this argument, President Reagan ignores it, and calls on Congress to revive support for the insurgents.  That only allows the Sandinistas to portray themselves as the victims of American bullying. They need to be challenged to put their presumed popularity to a real test, with offers to cancel the ''contra'' war and America's trade embargo. Since these American attacks are not likely to topple the Sandinistas in any case, they serve only to excuse their denials of freedom."
