"A Federal appeals court ruled yesterday that a former high Paraguayan police official - accused of kidnapping and torturing to death the son of a politically prominent Paraguayan physician -could be sued by the victim's family in a United States court. Relying on an obscure Federal statute enacted by the first Congress in 1789, the three-judge panel held that the plaintiffs, Joel Filartiga, a physician from Paraguay, and his daughter Dolly, were entitled to sue Americo Pena-Irala, the police official, for the torture-murder four years ago of Joelito, Dr. Filartiga's 17-year-old son. Mr. Pena is now in Paraguay. The Pena case caused an international furor after political groups opposed to the current Government in Parguay identified Mr. Pena as a member of a police ''death squad'' that investigated and tortured opponents of the Government of Gen. Alfred Stroessner. Dr. Filartiga, a longstanding opponent of the Stroessner Government, maintains his son was murdered in retaliation for his father's political beliefs. Lower Court Ruling Overturned Specifically, the court found that the Filartigas could sue in Federal Court as aliens who asserted a tort was committed in violation of the law of nations. A tort is a civil wrong that carries provisions for damages. In this case, the tort involved was the wrongful death of Joelito in Paraguay in 1976. The three-judge panel reversed a lower court ruling last year by Judge Eugene H. Nickerson of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.  Judge Nickerson threw out the $10 million damage suit filed by the Filartigas on the ground it lacked Federal jurisdiction. Yesterday the appeals court returned the case to Judge Nickerson for trial. Complicating what is an already complex constitutional proceeding is the fact that Mr. Pena, who was arrested for illegally entering the United States last year, was subsequently deported. The ruling by the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit establishes for the first time that Federal Courts have the power and jurisdiction to try purported acts of torture and award civil damages if a violation of the law of nations has been proved.  The opinion leaves open to further litigation the date from which the statute of limitations begins to run.  Decision Is Unanimous ''Among the rights universally proclaimed by all nations is the right to be free of physicial torture,'' wrote Chief Judge Irving R.  Kaufman in a unanimous opinion handed down yesterday. The two other members of the panel were Circuit Judges Wilfred Feinberg and Amalya L. Kearse. Peter Weiss, an associate for the Center for Constitutional Rights, and the lawyer for the Filartigas, said the ruling was consistent with recent trends to protect and expand civil and human rights. Mr. Weiss said the decision would have the practical effect of eliminating the United States as ''a safe haven for human rights violators from other countries.'' While Mr. Pena was here he was served with papers in the suit.  According to reports by the Organization of American States and Amnesty International, Mr. Pena and three other policemen beat, whipped and administered high voltage electric shocks that killed the teen-ager. The three judges found that ''deliberate torture perpetuated under color of official authority violates universally accepted norms of the international law of human rights, regardless of the nationality of the parties.'' Accordingly, the court held that whenever the alleged torturer is found and served with court papers by an alien living in the United States, the United States District Court is empowered to hear the suit. Until yesterday's action, it was commonly thought that whatever a Government official did to a citizen of his state was not governed by the law of nations. But lawyers said the decision also raised questions that, assuming no reversal by the Supreme Court, could take years to resolve: How is evidence obtained for such suits or in defense against them, particularly when the countries involved are politically repressive?  How will courts deal with politically false nuisance suits arising out of claims of torture difficult to substantiante? And what happens if the alien seeks to serve a diplomat of his country instead of the alleged torturer in an effort to embarrass the official? Mr. Pena's lawyer, Murry D. Brochin, could not be reached for comment. Under Federal rules, he may petition the U.S. Supreme Court of the United States or the entire bench of the Court of Appeals court to hear the case."
