"The Sandinista Government announced Thursday night that it would allow opposition parties 12 weeks to wage the first national political campaign since the 1979 guerrilla takeover. But opposition leaders said in a joint statement that they would refuse to take part unless ''laws which violate human rights'' are repealed. ''The calendar really isn't the point,'' said Mario Rappaccioli, a leader of the Democratic Conservative Party. ''If conditions for a free election do not exist, it doesn't matter if they give us two years to campaign.'' Elections Set for Nov. 4 Mr. Rappaccioli and other opposition leaders said they could not compete equally because they had been denied the right to organize in recent years. They also expressed fear that any rights granted to them during the 12- week campaign would be canceled immediately after the election. Bayardo Arce Castano, one of the nine Sandinista leaders, said such objections ''are normal when one feels weak.'' Nicaraguans are to elect a president, vice president and 90-member legislature on Nov. 4. The election comes at a time when the Sandinista Government is engaged in a war against United States-backed insurgents and also appears to face considerable dissatisfaction at home. Shortages of Goods Opposition activists said in interviews that the principal causes of discontent are shortages of goods, high prices and the military draft. They said the opposition was being fanned by increasingly direct anti-Government statements by Roman Catholic bishops. But opposition parties are small and divided. Most of their leaders believe that election laws give them no chance to compete fairly against the Sandinista Front. At Thursday night's ceremony, Mariano Fiallos Oyanguren, president of the Supreme Electoral Council, told an audience of dignitaries that the campaign would open Aug. 8 and close Oct. 31. He said voting would be restricted to those citizens who register during a four-day period in late July. Extending the registration period, he said, would be too costly and could expose election officials and citizens to excessive danger from insurgent attacks. Publish Complete Speeches Sandinista leaders repeated this week that they will give full freedom to opposition campaigners. A senior Sandinista official told correspondents that opposition rallies would be permitted and that newspapers would be free to publish anything a candidate said in a speech, unless it dealt with sensitive military matters. There are indications that the Sandinistas are gearing up for a major campaign effort. A company that erects roadside billboards is turning away all business until further notice because it has been contracted by the Sandinista Front to cover the northern provinces of Leon and Chinandega with Sandinista slogans. Opposition parties have also begun advertising campaigns. Their billboards do not refer directly to the upcoming campaign but carry party emblems with such mottos as ''The Future Is Ours'' and ''God, Order, Justice.'' At least one significant opposition party, however, appears ready to participate in the elections. The Independent Liberal Party is expected to nominate its leader, Virgilio Godoy Reyes, as a presidential candidate. ''The conditions are hardly optimal,'' said Mr. Godoy, who until two months ago served in the Sandinista Government as Minister of Labor. ''But this is the challenge we face. We are not afraid of it.'' The Sandinista Front has not named its candidate yet, but diplomats said they believed that a tentative decision has been made to nominate Daniel Ortega Saavedra, who as junta coordinator has been the principal Sandinista leader since 1981. Members of the front said this week that Sandinista candidates for all offices would be chosen at a convention next month. 9 Other Parties Involved Most of the nine other parties are also planning to hold conventions next month. Among them are the Democratic Conservatives and the Independent Liberals, remnants of the two parties that dominated Nicaraguan political life for more than a century until the Sandinista takeover. Both claim substantial followings, but Sandinista leaders dismiss them as ''miniparties'' out of touch with the times. Two leftist parties, one calling itself Socialist and the other Communist, were legally recognized this month and declared their intention to run candidates against the Sandinistas. Thursday night's threat to boycott the November election was signed by representatives of four political parties, two anti-Sandinista labor federations and the country's principal business federation. They said they would not nominate or support candidates unless they received an answer to a proposal they made five months ago calling for major political concessions from the Sandinista Government. In that proposal, dissidents asked the Sandinista Front to give up its political control of the army, the police and the national television network, end press censorship and abolish the military draft. They have also protested the naming of an electoral tribunal made up of three Sandinista sympathizers and the passage of election laws that grant the vote to 16-year-olds and to soldiers in the Sandinista army while denying it to Nicaraguans living abroad. In the last few weeks, they have concentrated their criticism on a new press law. Restrictions on Press Opposition spokesmen said the new law would effectively replace the Emergency Law, which the Government has pledged to lift before the campaign begins. The preamble to the law says ''the revolutionary Government has the duty to guarantee that the media are not used to push back the economic, social and political conquests which the people have achieved in the new Nicaragua.'' It calls on the press to ''convert itself into an agent of social change.'' The law would require all publications and broadcast programs to register with the Government Communications Secretariat. It would give the secretariat power to deny registration to any material that ''echoes the interests of imperialism or reproduces propaganda campaigns which internal and external enemies of the revolution promote against our process.''"
