"Former President Jorge Rafael Videla was indicted and jailed today by the military's top court on charges related to the thousands of deaths and disappearances that took place under his rule. General Videla, the first officer to be indicted by military courts in the human rights abuses, was the most powerful leader in the military circle that ruled for nearly eight years before the election of President Raul Alfonsin last year. General Videla led the coup that brought the military to power in 1976 and was president for the next five years. Almost all of the more than 8,000 disappearances - as well as hundreds of summary executions and countless cases of often gruesome torture - took place during an antiterrorism campaign in the first four years of General Videla's rule. The terms of the indictment were not made public today, but General Videla and eight other former junta members were charged personally by Mr. Alfonsin in January with ordering the abuses and spreading ''terror, pain and death throughout Argentine society.'' Rights Leaders Encouraged Government officials and human rights leaders, frustrated for months by what they said was the slow pace of military justice, said they hope the indictment of General Videla sets a precedent for more indictments to come soon. ''The military courts have finally moved after so many public complaints,'' Emilio Mignone, president of the Center for Legal and Social Studies, a leading human rights group, said in an interview. ''This is an important step.'' To that end, the military's top court, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, today was questioning Air Force Brig. Orlando Ramon Agosti, a member of the first junta with General Videla, and court sources said the council would decide tonight whether to also jail the brigadier. Before today, only two officers, Adm. Ruben Chamorro, head of a torture center, and Brig. Gen. Ramon Camps, a police chief, were being held by the military on accusations of human rights abuses, and both detentions were ordered by the Government, not the military. The two await trial. The three members of the junta that led the country into the 1982 Falkland war with Britain have been jailed by the Supreme Council, but on charges related to the war. The three are former President Leopoldo F. Galtieri, Adm. Jorge Isaac Anaya and Brig. Basilio Lami Dozo. Other Cases in Civilian Courts Several hundred officers have been charged in civilian courts with human rights abuses, and about a half dozen of these have been indicted and are jailed. Among the jailed are Adm. Emilio E. Massera, a former junta member; Gen. Otto Paladino, a head of state intelligence; and Maj. Ernesto Guillermo Barreiro, who may be the only indicted active duty officer, human rights leaders said. None of the officers has been convicted. Most of the civilian court cases are being transferred to military jurisdiction, however, with the result that the decisions by the nine retired officers who make up the military's Supreme Council are seen as of eminent importance. Two former military presidents, Generals Roberto E. Viola and Reynaldo B. Bignone, were jailed by civilian judges but were freed by the Supreme Council after their cases were transferred recently. The transfer has been a political gamble by Mr. Alfonsin to allow the military to cleanse itself. The Government pushed a law through Congress requiring the military trials, though civilian appeals courts still have automatic review over the military court decisions. The Supreme Court today rejected what seemed to be a paradoxical appeal by the nine accused junta members and General Camps to be tried by civilian courts. While many critics of the Government have charged that military judges will be too lenient in judging their own, the accused officers opposed the harshness of the military code of justice, under which requirements for proof are less stringent than under civilian law. There was no public reaction by the military today to the indictment of General Videla. The military has been increasingly restive about the prosecutions of middle-level active duty officers who followed orders. But sources in and out of the military have said the armed forces were generally willing to sacrifice General Videla and other retired junta members to pacify demands for prosecution. An Unwilling 'Scapegoat ' ''Videla is their scapegoat,'' one source said today. He is an unwilling one. General Videla has rejected private appeals by some officers to take the blame for abuses in order to protect the military as an institution. The general has instead led a public campaign in which retired officers have condemned the prosecutions and defended the military's actions as necessary to combat terrorism at the time. It is unlikely that the conviction of General Videla or a few other junta members would end the prosecutions anyway. Six Argentine human rights groups today submitted to the Senate a list of 896 active duty military officers who they say were involved in disappearances. A spokesman for the group said the list, the first such published, was designed to prevent the promotion of the officers. Meanwhile, the Goverment commission investigating the disappearances is said to be preparing a report, in which hundreds of officers will be named, to be turned over to the courts for possible prosecutions."
