"President Raul Alfonsin has dismissed the army Chief of Staff and three other generals in what was said to be an effort to quell dissent inside the army over prosecutions of military men for past human rights abuses. There has also been widespread unhappiness in the armed forces over the increasing civilian control of the military, officials here said today. They said the dismissals occurred Wednesday night and today. No Sign of Coup Plot The Government officials as well as Western diplomats here stressed that there was no sign that the military was prepared to stage a coup against the seven-month-old Alfonsin Government, which ended nearly eight years of military rule. They said that the Government regarded the dissent in the military as mostly a nuisance and that Mr. Alfonsi n's firm reaction was intended to assert clearly the Government's control over the armed forces. The Chief of Staff, Gen. Jorge H. Arguindegui, was forced into retirement for his inability to curb the dissent and the growing divisions in the army, the officials said. The general had been appointed by Mr. Alfonsin, and his ouster surprised most political and military leaders. Corps Commander Retired Also forced to retire were Gen. Pedro Pablo Mansilla, commander of the powerful corps with headquarters in Cordoba, and two other generals, Mario Leocio Cammis and Julian Eduardo Capanegra, managers in an industrial complex that the Government has been moving from military to civilian control. ''The internal military situtation is perfectly normal,'' Defense Minister Raul Borras said today. ''Democracy has in no way even been grazed.'' The dismissals came as an Argentine television station Wednesday night broadcast an interim report by a state commission investigating the thousands of disappearances, murders and torture cases that occurred in an antisubversion campaign under the military's rule. Many in the armed forces were known to be unhappy over the broadcast, saying it would inflame public resentment of the military for the abuses. The presidentially appointed inquiry panel, the National Commission for the Disappearance of Persons, reported that in the past seven months, it had collected nearly 6,000 testimonies on 8,800 missing people. It said most had disappeared when they were between 20 and 35 years of age, although 172 were children, many of them babies born in the military's 280 clandestine torture centers. Titled ''Never Again,'' the 90-minute broadcast presented mostly a series of relatives of the disappeared and survivors of torture centers who told their stories. Broadcast Annoyed Government The 12-member commission, headed by the novelist Ernesto Sabato, is independent and presented the documentary on its own, to the consternation of the Government. Officials said Mr. Alfonsin feared it might needlessly stir a military backlash just as he had decided Tuesday to carry out the dismissal of the generals. In an unplanned introduction to the documentary, Interior Minister Antonio Troccoli, on orders of Mr. Alfonsin, sought apparently to placate the military. He condemned the military repression but noted it was provoked by terrorism and social chaos. ''We love, we respect and we need the armed forces,'' he said. ''We cannot blame them for what was done by the small minorities of one sector or another that took justice into their hands.'' Nevertheless, the concern about dissent in the armed forces moved Mr. Alfonsin to order Mr. Borras to call in General Arguindegui late Wednesday and demand his retirement, officials said. The general had annoyed the Government Friday when he said in a radio interview that factions in the army opposed to him were threatening to ''destabilize'' the forces. General Arguindegui was also said to be ineffective in handling the Government's deep cuts in the military budget and plans to streamline the forces. Had Protested Arrests General Mansilla was a leader of the dissent, obstructing the commission's investigation and protesting the recent arrest of two army captains under his command for the deaths of two prisoners under the military's rule. He had turned Cordoba into a center where retired officers have been issuing public protests against the prosecutions. The Government is prosecuting nine former junta members, and dozens of privately brought cases are being tried. The other two ousted generals repeatedly balked at the Government's assertion of civilian control over the industrial complex, Fabricaciones Militares, which they said was illegal. The complex makes everything from tanks to plows, and as the nation's largest single employer, it has been a source of military political patronage. Gen. Ricardo Pianta, an artillery officer, was sworn in today as the new army commander."
