"The Archbishop of Managua told United States supporters earlier this year that he is actively directing efforts by his diocese to prevent the Government from imposing a Communist system in Nicaragua, according to business executives who met with the Catholic leader. During a visit to New York in May, Archbishop Miguel Obando y Bravo said his campaign represented the best organized opposition in Nicaragua to Sandinista efforts to install a Marxist- Leninist society, and he appealed for financial help, the executives said. The Archbishop's comments, and the extent of his organizing effort, indicated that his opposition to the Sandinista Government is more intense and focused than he has made known in Managua. Archbishop Obando, who opposed former Nicaraguan leader Anastasio Somoza Debayle and supported the Sandinista efforts to overthrow him, has moved steadily away from the new Government since it seized power in 1979. Diocese Divided Into Units The business executives who talked with the Archbishop reported that the opposition program he described included dividing his diocese into old and new units, including parishes, districts and smaller groups, for leadership and religious training. The exact nature of the training and the type of help the Archbishop requested were not clear. According to the executives he saw in New York, the Archbishop said the training in Managua included courses on leadership, religion, health and nutrition. He said he lacked both money and equipment to conduct training for everyone who was disenchanted with the Government. Although Archbishop Obando said his efforts were focused on preserving the sanctity of the church against Government intrusion, the business executives said, he made clear that he hoped the Sandinistas could be removed from power if they did not moderate their policies. Archbishop Obando said today that his activities were not political. In an interview in Managua, he said, ''The mission of a pastor is not to overthrow governments.'' He said the training units he established in Managua were ''pastoral cadres, not military cadres to overthrow governments.'' ''If we oppose the Government, we oppose only the injustice, the violation of human rights'' and the recent expulsion of 10 foreign priests, he added. Made Known by Government The content of his meetings in New York was first made known by supporters of the Nicaraguan Government, who provided a copy of an internal memorandum prepared by an executive of W. R. Grace & Company after a meeting with the Archbishop. The Sandinista supporters said they had obtained the document from a source within the company whom they refused to identify. Two W. R. Grace executives did not challenge the authenticity of the document.  Archbishop Obando's criticism of the Government has increased this year. At a mass in Managua in May, he said the Government was ''capable of any barbarity.'' He added, ''To those who say the only course for Central American countries is Marxism-Leninism, we Christians must show another way.'' Following a meeting with Archbishop Obando, executives at W. R. Grace arranged for the Sarita Kenedy East Foundation to contribute copies of the Bible, rosary beads and other supplies to aid the church effort, a company executive said. The foundation, based in New York, is headed by J. Peter Grace, the chairman of W. R. Grace. The company has long been in business in Latin America. The Archbishop, in the interview today in Managua, said he had discussed the situation in Nicaragua with Pope John Paul II during a visit to the Vatican earlier this year. When Pope John Paul II visited Nicaragua last year, he criticized priests and other church officials who were actively involved in the Government and politics. Several priests, including the Foreign Minister, Miguel D'Escoto Brockman, hold important posts in the Government. Aid From U.S. Halted Archbishop Obando said the church at one time had received indirect assistance from the Agency for International Development, the State Department organization that coordinates the distribution of most United States economic and humanitarian aid. He said the church had not received American aid in recent years. Reagan Administration officials said that the United States has not given aid to church groups in Nicaragua in recent years and that the Central Intelligence Agency has not tried to influence Catholic opposition efforts. They said, however, that they were aware of the Archbishop's work and called it effective and well organized. For the last three years, the Administration has provided arms and financial aid to Nicaraguan rebels. Congress earlier this year refused to give the C.I.A. additional money for the rebels, but the issue is expected to come up again as the budget for the fiscal year 1985 is considered. The Sandinistas, wary of the Catholic opposition, expelled 10 foreign priests earlier this month, accusing them of carrying out ''intensive political work.'' In April, Archbishop Obando led a Good Friday procession through Managua that President Reagan later described as a ''demonstration of defiance.'' Two days later, on Easter Sunday, Nicaragua's nine Roman Catholic bishops issued a pastoral letter criticizing the Sandinista Government and urging it to open negotiations with leaders of armed insurgent groups. Nicaragua's Catholic Church is divided, with a small number of pro- Sandinista priests presiding over a ''people's church'' that does not respond to the direction of the nine bishops."
