"Jose Napoleon Duarte, the President-elect of El Salvador, said today that he was confident that the Salvadoran Army would support his efforts to introduce democracy and abolish the right-wing death squads in his country. But in his first public appearance since arriving here Saturday night for a brief visit before his inauguration June 1, Mr. Duarte was also careful to avoid any controversy with the Salvadoran military leadership. He said that after discussions with military leaders he had decided to ask Gen. Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova to remain as Defense Minister. He said the general, the former commander of the national guard, had accepted his program and had agreed to make ''a declaration of loyalty and support for democracy.'' No Power-Sharing With Rebels Mr. Duarte stressed that he had no intention of negotiating with the leftist guerrillas over any form of power- sharing. He was willing to have ''a national dialogue'' with all political groups ''to talk about the problems of the country,'' he said, but ''not to distribute the piece of cake.'' Mr. Duarte, head of the Christian Democrats, was declared the winner of El Salvador's presidential elections last week after the runoff May 6 against Roberto d'Aubuisson, head of the conservative Nationalist Republican Alliance. He won 54 percent of the vote against 46 percent for Mr. d'Aubuisson. On Monday Mr. Duarte is scheduled to confer with President Reagan and with Secretary of State George P. Shultz. He is also due to meet with members of Congress to lobby for passage of military and economic aid for his country. Congress Deadlocked on Aid The House and Senate are deadlocked over emergency military aid of $62 million for El Salvador, with the Senate in favor and the House reluctant to approve it. House leaders, such as Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, chairman of a key House Appropriations subcommittee, are expected to seek commitments from Mr. Duarte on ending civil and human rights abuses in El Salvador as a price for the aid. Mr. Duarte appeared on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press'' and then with an aide, Julio Rey Prendes, chatted with reporters. He stressed that he was ready to give pledges to move against right-wing death squads and other violators but that he believed these should not be forced on him as conditions for economic or military aid, as suggested by Mr. Long and other House Democrats. 'I Know My Responsibility' ''I don't agree with conditions from one side to another,'' he said. ''I believe on the responsibilities that each government has. And I think that I understand the problems of my country. I will confront the abuses of authority, the problems of death squads, the problems of violence, the problems of injustice, the problems of lack of opportunities.'' ''I know my responsibility to my people and I'm going to confront that,'' he said. Mr. Duarte said he needed help and support from all friendly and democratic countries of the world ''and specifically the United States.'' Visits 3 Heads of State Before flying here he visited the heads of state of Honduras, Guatemala and Costa Rica. Mr. Duarte was the choice of most members of Congress and of the Administration to win the Salvadoran election because of Mr. d'Aubuisson's purported ties to the death squads responsible for many political killings in El Salvador. The Central Intelligence Agency reportedly funneled some $600,000 to El Salvador to help Mr. Duarte's election campaign. On ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Duarte said he had ''no information'' about receiving C.I.A. money. Mr. Duarte seem unbothered by the issue. He said that reports of C.I.A. support had helped him because the Salvadoran right wing, which had accused him of receiving such money, had earlier said he was in the pay of the Communists. He also said he had ''no problem'' about receiving money from democratic countries because ''you have to remember that we're fighting against an hegemony of power of the extreme right, who had millions of millions of money support from all over the world.'' ''And we had no support from anybody,''he said. ''And we have been doing this all by ourself.'' Rebel Offensive Predicted The Administration has said that El Salvador faces a major guerrilla offensive in the fall and needs all the aid it can get now to build up its armed forces. Mr. Duarte said the Salvadoran forces had only a three-month supply of ammunition left and was using up about ''150,000 bullets a day.'' ''Therefore, this is a dramatic situation because we are absolutely dependent on the supply of these bullets,'' he said. He said that in his last meeting with Salvadoran military leaders, he had suggested they think of building an ammunition factory so the country could be independent of foreign sources. On the specific steps he might take to end the death squads, Mr. Duarte said he would appoint a special commission, directly responsible to him, to investigate past crimes attributed to these squads. ''The country will not accept any more of these kinds of abuses,'' he said. ''We will establish the basis of discipline.'' When Mr. Duarte was reminded that he had expressed concern in the past about the military's willingness to accept democratic, civilian rule, he replied that the military high command was now ready ''to give back the power to the people'' while the guerrillas were trying to impose power on the people. ''The army institution has changed a lot,'' he said. ''And this is the only reason why I am here and this is the only reason why I can be president, the first civilian president in the last 50 years. I think the army will back up and is ready to support the effort we're going to do in the direction of democracy.''"
