"It was not the Democrats but Richard Nixon who offered the best response to President Reagan's militant simplicities about Central America Wednesday night. Speaking about third-world social crises just a few hours before the President's address, Mr. Nixon said, ''The trouble is that the Communists at least talk about the problem, and too often we just talk about the Communists.'' Mr. Reagan then illustrated that point. Analyzing the turmoil in Central America, he talked mainly about Communism, Cuba and the Soviet Union, with a few mentions of the P.L.O. and Libya as fillips. As a sales pitch for arms aid to El Salvador, Soviet-bashing will surely work, especially in an election year. Mr. Reagan protects himself against any setback by already blaming Congress and the Democrats for doing too little, too late. But a policy rooted in exaggeration of the Soviet threat implies only further acquiescence in the outrages of alleged anti-Communists, whose greed and brutality feed the leftist insurgency.  Sure there's a problem, and Moscow and Havana are trying to capitalize on it. But they didn't create it. After a century of misrule, neglect and repression, as Mr. Nixon says, some countries ''need a revolution,'' and at this late hour the only question is whether it can still be made democratic. El Salvador's probable next President, Jose Napoleon Duarte, gave much the same answer after hearing Mr. Reagan. He told ABC television that external meddling in the region was a reality but that internal causes were ''basic.'' President Reagan managed to blame the left for poverty and unemployment in El Salvador while dismissing in a paragraph the role of the violent right. He spoke poignantly of Salvadoran soldiers down to their last few bullets without acknowledging the more awkward truth - that despite millions in arms aid since 1981, the insurgency has steadily expanded to a third of the country.  Smuggled arms matter, but revolutions cannot be exported like butter and bacon. If they could, why have the American-backed ''contras'' in Nicaragua failed to win control of a single town or province?  Americans should indeed help the region's democrats when, like Mr. Duarte, they demonstrate a capacity to use the aid to outbid both the left and the right. That is why, in passing on aid to Salvador, as the House did yesterday, Congress should continue to insist that its recipients be held at least minimally accountable for respecting elementary human rights.  But these are conditions that only an alert and deft Administration can enforce. It will not succeed if it remains so mesmerized by Communists that it keeps yielding to the terror and corruption that gave them their opening in the first place."
