"President-elect Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador said today that he ''will never'' ask American troops to fight in his country. At the same time, Mr. Duarte appealed to Congress to approve more aid now without attaching what he called degrading conditions that would ''violate the principle of sovereignty.'' The 59-year-old Christian Democratic Party leader said his country urgently needed the aid. A telephoned bomb threat briefly delayed Mr. Duarte's speech at the Washington Hilton Hotel. The police cleared and searched the hall while outside about 200 protesters shouted slogans against American involvement in Central America and Mr. Duarte's appeals for more aid. Appeal for Reagan Plan In his speech, Mr. Duarte called on Congress to adopt the Reagan Administration's five-year, $8 billion aid program for Central America, including $178 million in military aid for El Salvador this year. Mr. Duarte, who won election May 6 and is to be inaugurated June 1, said he understood that Americans were impatient at the pace of progress toward democracy in El Salvador, angered by the political violence of right-wing death squads and eager for an early political settlement of the country's civil war. But after a day of meetings with President Reagan and other top Administration officials, he contended that the tight conditions on military aid advocated by many members of Congress were degrading and unacceptable to his country. No 'Unilateral Conditions' ''We in El Salvador will not accept unilateral conditions invented by anyone, no matter how well intentioned they may be,'' he declared in a speech to the Foreign Policy Association and World Affairs Council, two private organizations that sponsored his five-day visit here. ''To impose unilateral conditions on the people in the name of democracy is to take away part of the freedom for which they are fighting,'' he asserted. ''If all of us truly believe in democracy, if we believe in nations governed by their own people, then the people must be given a chance. Give us that chance, that's what I have come to ask.'' He pledged to carry out provisions of the Salvadoran Constitution and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which he said impose ''standards far more severe, far more difficult to meet and far more important to freedom than any of those proposed by members of Congress to be imposed for El Salvador.'' ''We agree with the objectives and intentions of those who would condition aid,'' said Mr. Duarte, who as an outspoken foe of right-wing power centers in El Salvador and an advocate of elections and land redistribution has a good reputation on Capitol Hill. ''I am here to ask that you have faith in me.'' After their one-hour meeting at the White House, President Reagan and President-elect Duarte issue a two- page joint communique asserting that a settlement of the Salvadoran civil war ''should take place within the democratic rule which establishes that the only access to power is in accordance with the will of the people expressed through free elections.'' They agreed on three main objectives: the strengthening of democratic institutions in Central America and El Salvador; the improvement of living standards and expanded economic development, and increased American aid ''to obtain peace and to defend against Communist-supported guerrillas of the extreme left and the violence of the extreme right.'' Emerging from the White House meeting this morning, Mr. Duarte was asked specifically whether he would end right-wing death squad violence, which has been one of the major reasons for Congress to seek limits and conditions on aid. ''I have the will,'' he told reporters, ''and I said it in my language, in Spanish, I say, 'I have the guts to do it.' '' ''I have pledged to my people that I'm going to work hard to stop the death squads, to stop the abuses of authority and to stop the cultural violence that is in force in our country,'' he added. The Salvadoran President-elect sought in his speech to reassure Americans that American combat troops would not be needed in the Salvadoran civil war. ''I have said before emphatically that we will never ask you to send American troops to fight on our soil,'' he said. ''It would be immoral to ask for the lives of young Americans.'' After his speech he was pressed to assert that he was making that same declaration now, and he said, ''I'll never ask for foreign troops to enter my country.'' The Reagan Administration has been counting on Mr. Duarte's election and his vigorous advocacy of a large amount of unconditional aid to break the impasse in Congress on this issue. A House-Senate conference broke up last week unable to agree on a package of $62 million in emergency military aid for El Salvador and $21 million for Nicaraguan insurgents opposed to the Sandanista Government in Managua. On Tuesday, Mr. Duarte will carry his case for more aid into meetings with Congressional leaders and critics of Administration policy on Central America. Today, in addition to President Reagan, he met with Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, Peter McPherson, administrator of the Agency for International Development, and top officials of the Inter-American Development Bank and the International Monetary Fund. President Reagan, in his talks with Mr. Duarte, seemed to link continuing support for Nicaraguan rebels with pledges to aid El Salvador, although some influential members of Congress, such as Representative Jim Wright of Texas, the majority leader, have tried to separate the two issues. Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said the President told Mr. Duarte that progress in El Salvador would be difficult because of Nicaragua's aid to leftist guerrillas there. On this issue, Mr. Duarte has taken a less clear stand. Talking with several reporters Sunday, Mr. Duarte said he favored American support of efforts by Nicaraguan rebels to block what he said was the flow of arms and munitions from Nicaragua into El Salvador but said he did not favor supporting the overthrow of the Sandanista Government. Tonight, Mr. Duarte came closer than previously to depicting the Salvadoran civil war in terms used by President Reagan, as a common struggle against the revolutionary Salvadoran left backed by Nicaragua, Cuba and the Soviet Union. He devoted as much effort to arguing against conditions on American aid as to insuring that it continue, and he alluded to his own past torture in military prisons in appealing for American confidence in his sincerity in combating abuses of power. ''I can understand that many are concerned about the death squads and about the violence, so they seek to condition U.S. aid - threatening to cut off assistance unless the violence ends,'' he said. ''I sympathize with their concern. But can they be as concerned as the Salvadoran people? I doubt it.'' Then he read the ban in the Salvadoran Constitution against ''crucial, inhuman or degrading treatment'' and added his personal footnote: ''I know what I'm talking about.''"
