"Jose Napoleon Duarte, the Christian Democrats' candidate for President of El Salavdor, said today that if elected he would set up a special commission to investigate slayings by the death squads. The candidate, speaking in an interview at his guarded home, said that his priority as President would be to rid the country of ''cultural violence,'' abuses of authority and death squads, including those believed to involve members of the military ''We cannot achieve peace,'' Mr. Duarte said, ''without first achieving the security of all Salvadorans.'' Mr. Duarte is running against Roberto d'Aubuisson, the candidate of the far-rightist Nationalist Republican Alliance, in the runoff election next Sunday. He predicted he would win with 60 percent of the vote. Contrasting Statements His statements, and insistence that he will make the changes necessary to end ''institutional'' violence, contrasted sharply with the reality within the armed forces described by the country's Defense Minister in an interview late Sunday. While the two did not disagree on what needs to be done in El Salvador, the Defense Minister, Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova, suggested that human rights problems would have to be resolved over a longer period of time. Both also talked about how divisive the election campaign had been and indicated there would be problems after the voting on Sunday. The different styles of the two men - Mr. Duarte appears strident while General Vides Casanova is more circumspect - also gives some indication of the difficulties Mr. Duarte may meet in seeking changes should he be elected. Diplomats have said that the success of the new civilian government will depend on its relationship with the armed forces. Duarte 'Not an Ogre' In the interview, his first with foreign reporters in several months, General Vides Casanova said that the armed forces were ready to accept personnel changes, rather than radical structural ones. The army's reaction to command changes, he said, would depend on the ''form'' in which they were carried out. The Defense Minister said that it was probable Mr. Duarte would win the elections, but added that the armed forces could live with either candidate. The armed forces, he said, collaborated with Mr. Duarte when he was president of the governing junta from December 1980 to March 1982. ''In this sense,'' he said, ''many people learned that they could live with Duarte and that he is not an ogre.'' The Defense Minister also said that he would set up a special unit to investigate death squad activities and that a new president would be free to form new units. General Vides Casanova warned, however, that ''whoever commits the error of trying to change the institution at full speed will not obtain anything.'' Rights as President Cited At the same time, he said, he did not expect Mr. Duarte to try to disband any of the country's three security forces, which United States officials said are primarily responsible for human rights abuses within the military. Mr. Duarte, asked about suggestions that the armed forces would not accept structural changes, stressed his right as President to make any changes that the Constitution allows. ''The President,'' he said, ''has authority based on the Constitution and is the general commander of the armed forces.'' He declined to say whether he planned structural changes within the armed forces. He said he would discuss any changes with ''the high command of the armed forces when the moment arises.'' Murder Cases Noted Mr. Duarte added that his government would need to demonstrate to the world that it was ready to ''prosecute crimes'' that have affected the country. He mentioned the cases of Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero, who was assassinated by a right-wing death squad in 1980, and the murder of four American churchwomen in 1981. Both cases, he said, would be taken up by the special investigatory commission. The candidate, who is recovering from laryngitis, said that in forming a Cabinet he would consider members of all the political parties except that of Mr. d'Aubuisson. Asked whether he thought the Nationalist Republican Alliance would be content to play a legal opposition role in the new civilian government, he said, ''They only repect the law when it is convenient because they only believe in power for the sake of power.'' ''Yes, I believe they could be a force that uses illegal methods, pressure or political actions that maintain a state of tension or destabilization in the country,'' he added. ''The problem is whether or not they will be able to do it.'' Country Called Polarized The Defense Minister said Sunday that the presidential campaign had ''polarized'' the country and promised that the armed forces would play a mediating role. The two candidates, he said, ''have completely different programs and try to destroy the personality of the other.'' ''After the elections, a united armed forces will bring the nation together.'' General Vides Casanova acknowledged that the armed forces were not completely apolitical, but said ''the majority'' of the officials understood the importance of remaining outside of politics, both to earn the respect of the Salvadoran people and to gain international support."
