"Responding to Timerman  As president of the Delegation of Jewish Associations of Argentina (D.A.I.A.), from 1973 to 1980, I would like to respond to Jacobo Timerman's charges of passivity on the part of the leaders of the Jewish community during the repression by the Argentine military regime (''Return to Argentina,'' March 11). On March 20, 1984, in a hearing before the National Commission on Disappeared Persons, at which the Argentine writer Ernesto Sabato presided, the board of the D.A.I.A. presented a dossier containing documentation in support of the board's efforts in defense of Jewish honor and dignity. I shall briefly cite some facts mentioned in that dossier: (1) From the beginning of the repression, the Jewish community was the only one to file before the Government lists of detainees and disappeared, demanding their liberty and return. (2) The Jewish community was the only one to appoint a representative, Rabbi Roberto Graetz, to the Permanent Assembly of Human Rights, the main organization that defended human rights in Argentina during the years of repression. (3) In statements published in Mundo Israelita on March 16, 1979, and in Nueva Presencia on March 17, 1979, we denounced the maltreatment of Jews, and we repeated these charges before the human- rights commission of the Organization of American States. (4) When Nazi groups tried in April 1977 to use the ''Graiver case'' to start an anti-Semitic campaign, the D.A.I.A. publicly exposed the ''dark pogromist forces'' at work and emphatically stated that ''there will never again be passive or silent Jews.'' In the same declaration, we demanded freedom for Jacobo Timerman, and this remained our unceasing concern until his release. The forceful portions of this declaration were printed in The New York Times on May 15, 1977, and, surprisingly, in Timerman's paper, La Opinion, on May 10, 1977, before its seizure. (5) The D.A.I.A. was successful in its request to have rabbis visit Jewish detainees in jail. (6) During the repression, the D.A.I.A. was instrumental in the closing of the Nazi publishing houses Milica and Odal. During this period of hardship, there was, indeed, terror and ambiguity, but not on the part of the D.A.I.A. leadership.  We regret the confusion that remains among some of the Mothers of the Plaza de Mayo regarding the Jewish community and the D.A.I.A. but we feel that when they learn of the evidence submitted to the National Commission on Disappeared Persons, they will realize that people who do not have the mothers' feelings at heart are trying to take advantage of their grief. NEHEMIAS RESNIZKY Buenos Aires"
