"Narrow Chance in El Salvador Having bet heavily on El Salvador's election, President Reagan seems in sight of a victory - but just. Jose Napoleon Duarte, the moderate Christian Democrat who was properly preferred by Washington, seems to have won a narrow victory over a right-wing extremist, and also over the boycott and disruptions of leftist guerrillas. Something rare in Central America and unique in El Salvador seems within his grasp: a legal transfer of power to a centrist committed to human rights, reform and reconciliation. If that outcome is confirmed, Mr. Reagan's address on Central America expected this week will rightly make the most of the Administration's first real success in El Salvador and strengthen its bid for the arms aid that has been stalled in Congress. Yet however vital weapons may be to the Salvadoran armed forces, they matter less than the political help Mr. Duarte will need to command the military tiger he is about to mount. Every cause that Mr. Duarte has championed has been bitterly contested by the Salvadoran right and its allies in the military. In 1972 he was robbed of an election, tortured and banished. Returning from exile in 1979, he was tolerated as president of an interim junta but denied any power over the armed forces. The same officers who denied him in the past warned only the other day that even an elected president could not reorder their lines of command or curb the security forces associated with death squads. Few officer corps anywhere have claimed more for themselves with as meager a showing on the battlefield. Most of the 30,000 victims of El Salvador's civil war have been noncombatants, yet there is not a single known instance of a Salvadoran officer being punished for human rights crimes. These excesses, and not the popularity of guerrillas, explain the spread of an insurgency that, despite American weapons and advisers, has spread to a third of the country. Believing itself autonomous, the army will want to regard a narrowly elected Mr. Duarte as only a necessary fig leaf to obtain American aid, which it has arrogantly taken for granted. The officers are half right. If Mr. Duarte's election is confirmed he will indeed have leverage and standing in the United States. He will need every bit of it if he pursues his desire to seek a political settlement with democratic forces on the guerrilla side.  Mr. Duarte's mandate for change is sure to be challenged as insufficient. But any majority seems ample in an election skewed to the right by the leftist boycott. Simply by assuming office, an elected President could begin to demonstrate that democratic institutions can take root in El Salvador. In a country that has known little but tyranny, the rule of law and civilian control over the military are truly radical ideas.  If there is a center in El Salvador, Mr. Duarte alone seems able still to define it. And if Sunday's balloting gave him that chance, he will need the energetic encouragement of Americans and democrats everywhere."
