"Frank V. Ortiz Jr. will be replaced shortly as United States Ambassador to Guatemala after what Administration officials described as a bitter internal debate over United States policy toward that country. Mr. Ortiz, the highest-ranking Hispanic-American in the Foreign Service, has been in the post for only 11 months, during which violent political polarization has continued. The Ambassador, who has devoted most of his 29-year diplomatic career to Latin American affairs, has been accused by human-rights organizations of being too closely identified with the military Government of Maj. Gen. Romeo Lucas Garcia and conservative forces. In a long confidential report this month to Secretary of State Edmund S. Muskie, Mr. Ortiz said: ''My greatest immediate fear is not so much that the far left will take over Guatemala any time soon, but that the most retrograde elements on the right will unleash an even greater wave of terror.'' ''Guatemala is a blood bath waiting to happen,'' Mr. Ortiz told Mr. Muskie. ''It would not take much to induce the ultraright to unleash a mass elimination of the groups considered of the left.'' Amnesty International estimated last November that 2,000 people were killed in Guatemalan political violence during the previous eight months. The Central American republic has a population of just over six million. The Ambassador said that although there were ''many moderate and even some leftist elements in the Government, it clearly tilts toward the far right.'' The Government, he said, avoids confrontation with the far right and, ''when it employs heavy-handed repression in dealing with political dissidents, becomes undistinguishable from the ultras.'' Mr. Ortiz, who is in Washington for consultations, will return to Guatemala next week to wind up his mission. He declined to comment on his situation, but friends said he resented learning that he was to be replaced from a dispatch in The New York Times on June 15. Administration specialists said Mr. Ortiz's differences on how to approach Guatemalan problems went beyond the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs to the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, to which he reports directly. The text of Mr. Ortiz's cable, dated June 19, was made available to The Times. The envoy strongly implied that his efforts to ''strengthen the middle'' were frustrated by statements from Washington giving the impression that the United States favored the leftist opposition. A high-ranking State Department official said it had long been obvious that Mr. Ortiz's analysis of the Guatemalan situation was not shared by other Adminstration specialists. The official said he feared that the departure of Mr. Ortiz from Guatemala would bring about ''a complete polarization'' of the sentiment toward Central America in Congress, where powerful forces are trying to block American aid to Nicaragua and El Salvador. In his cable, Mr. Ortiz said the ideal Guatemalan policy was a ''nonconfrontational posture of unmistakable support for the essential political freedoms.'' Mr. Ortiz said that ''epochal happenings in Nicaragua and El Salvador and unmistakable signals of increased Cuban (and perhaps ultimately Soviet) support'' had emboldened the far left in Guatemala. He said the far left was probably unwilling now ''to dialogue, to accept concessions, or even to share power in the constituted institutional framework.''"
