"A New York-based human rights organization says in a report that rights abuses against Nicaragua's Miskito Indian population have ended. But the group, in a report on the overall human rights situation in Nicaragua issued last week, said that press censorship continued and that abuses at detention centers had increased. The 51-page report by the group, Americas Watch, its third such review concerning Nicaragua, praised steps the Government had taken to eliminate abuses against Miskito Indians, but also criticized it for failing to account for Indians who disappeared in 1982. A spokesman for the State Department, Paula Kuzmich, said Friday that the department had not yet received a copy of the report and thus could not comment on it. List of Disappearances Last year the Moravian Church in Nicaragua compiled a list of 70 Miskito Indians who disappeared in 1982. While many have still not been accounted for, the report said, ''for reasons unknown to Americas Watch, but probably related to changes in the local or regional military command, no such cases of disappearances involving Miskitos have been reported since that time.'' Thousands of Miskito Indians have been uprooted from their homelands along the Caribbean coast and the Honduran border, caught in the middle of fighting between the Nicaraguan Government and the rebels trying to overthrow it. The Indians have also been subject to reeducation efforts by the Sandinista Government, which has tried to integrate the Indians into cooperative settlements.  ''An amnesty in December 1983 has freed more than 300 Miskito prisoners'' and restrictions on free movement have been eased, the Americas Watch report said. ''The most serious reports of deterioration in the human rights situation involve the arrest and detention of many persons for long periods before charges are brought or before they are released and abusive treatment of those who are detained,'' the organization concluded. The findings are based on a study by three Americas Watch members who visited Nicaragua in February and interviewed Government officials, private citizens and members of the official human rights body."
