"For the last two months a small, cluttered apartment in a middle-income neighborhood of Washington has served as the nerve center of a campaign aimed at altering the political landscape of El Salvador and the course of American policy in Central America. Acting as the point men for a group of critics of Reagan Administration policies in Latin America, the two occupants of the apartment, a former Congressional aide and a political refugee from El Salvador, made hundreds of phone calls in an effort to find public platforms for a former Salvadoran official who said he could implicate Salvadoran military and civilian leaders in terrorist acts. In an article published by The New York Times on March 3 and in an interview broadcast by CBS News on Wednesday, the former official, whose background in sensitive military posts in El Salvador was confirmed by American officials, accused Roberto d'Aubuisson, a leading candidate for El Salvador's presidency, and several top Salvadoran military officers of directing death squads. These accusations could not be independently verified. Information provided by the former official linking a top Salvadoran security officer with the Central Intelligence Agency was confirmed and was the subject of an article in The Times on Thursday. The former official, who has asked to remain anonymous for fear of reprisals, appeared in disguise in the CBS News interview. A Familiar Washington Practice The appearance of the former official, particularly the disclosure this week that he was promised $50,000 by the group of critics if he spoke out, has focused new attention on a familiar Washington practice: the use of information by both private groups and the Government to influence public opinion and Congress. With the approach of the presidential election in El Salvador on Sunday and the current consideration by Congress of Administration requests for large increases in economic and military aid to El Salvador, a contest of charges and countercharges about the role of Salvadoran officials in the death squads has suddenly intensified. Both Administration officials and critics of President Reagan's policies in Central America said the struggle could have a major impact on developments in El Salvador and American attitudes toward that country. ''We're talking about thousands of lives and justice in El Salvador,'' said Leonel Gomez, the Salvadoran refugee who helped coordinate the appearance of the former Salvadoran official. He was helped by Bruce P. Cameron, a former aide to Representative Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa. Mr. Cameron is director of a Central America project for Americans for Democratic Action. ''If we can get people in El Salvador and America to understand who's been behind the death squads, we may be able to make a difference,'' Mr. Gomez added.  Administration Criticism President Reagan this week criticized people who express concern for human rights ''while pursuing policies that lead to the overthrow of less-then- perfect democracies by Marxist dictatorships.'' He said such people were ''naive and/or downright phony.'' Echoing his remarks, a senior State Department official said, ''Our entire effort to prevent the growth of Soviet and Cuban influence in Central America will be undercut if the public and Congress get caught up in a furor over the death squads.'' The men who encouraged the former Salvadoran official to present his story to the public said that their effort, including the payment so far of $29,500 of the $50,000, was no different from actions by other private groups and the Government who have supported defectors or other sources and made them available to reporters. Senator Paul E. Tsongas, a Massachusetts Democrat who has met with the former Salvadoran official and urged him to disclose his identity, cited as a ''parallel case'' two former Filipino officials, Jose Fronda Santos and Maj. Ernesto Rosales, who last month gave the House Foreign Affairs Committee information about human rights abuses in the Philippines. Mr. Tsongas said the two men received financial help from sympathetic Americans to help pay their living expenses in the United States. Other Dissidents and Defectors Mr. Tsongas said two South Korean dissidents, Kim Dae Jung and Lee Shin Bom, had also received money from Korean-Americans and others in the United States to help cover living expenses. The Government, in recent years, has made several Soviet bloc defectors available to the press, including Zdzislaw Rurarz, the former Polish Ambassador to Japan. Although the Central Intelligence Agency and the State Department do not comment on how much help such people receive, officials from both agencies said the Government had spent $300,000 to $400,000 to help some defectors establish new lives in the United States. In 1982, reporters were notified by aides to Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States delegate to the United Nations, that a leader of Nicaragua's Miskito Indians, Steadman Fagoth M""uller, would visit the United States and was willing to be interviewed. It was not clear who paid his expenses, but Mr. Fagoth's trip appeared to be coordinated by the Administration, which often cited him as a leading opponent of the Nicaraguan Government. Salvadoran Leader Helped Last year before a visit to the United States by the Provisional President of El Salvador, Alvaro Magana, Administration officials went to El Salvador to help prepare him for appearances before Congress and the press. The officials, according to a State Department aide, suggested that Mr. Magana replace his tinted glasses when he appeared on television to avoid looking sinister. Along with Mr. Gomez and Mr. Cameron, the group that formed to arrange the appearance of the former Salvadoran official included Robert E. White, the American Ambassador to El Salvador from 1979 to 1981, Philippe Villers, the president of Automatix Inc., a Burlington, Mass., manufacturer of robot systems, aides to three Democratic members of Congress and Lindsay Mattison, the director of the Center for Development Policy, a Washington research organization that has opposed Administration policy in Central America. Purveyors of Information The center is one of several research, lobbying and public relations organizations that play a significant role in policy debates by providing information to members of Congress and reporters. Both liberal and conservative groups have relied increasingly on these kinds of organizations to disseminate information favorable to their position on many issues. Reporters, for example, recently received an extensive packet of information about Salvadoran guerrilla leaders called ''El Salvador's Opposition . . . Meet the people who cannot participate in the March 25 elections.'' It was prepared by Fenton Communications, a New York and Washington public relations agency that specializes in representing liberal and left-of-center groups. Reporters in Washington receive a steady stream of press releases and other information from conservative groups as well. In the late 1970's conservative groups sponsored a visit to the United States by Ian D. Smith, the leader of what was then Rhodesia, and more recently conservative Salvadoran politicians have visited Washington on trips coordinated by private groups that support Reagan Administration policy. How This Case Began The effort to bring the former Salvadoran official into public view began late last year when Mr. Gomez, once the deputy director of El Salvador's land redistribution program, received a call from the Salvadoran official. Mr. Gomez was granted political asylum in the United States after the director of the land redistribution program was assassinated in 1981. Operating out of a three-room apartment on 17th Street near Dupont Circle that he shares with Mr. Cameron, Mr. Gomez said he tried to put together a book deal that would combine a substantial advance for the former official with the prospect of news coverage. He approached several authors, he said, but was rebuffed. Mr. Gomez, who said it was his idea to raise money for the former official to help support him and move his family from El Salvador, eventually turned for help to Mr. Cameron who, in turn, called Mr. Villers. Mr. Villers, who said he was ''deeply troubled'' by conditions in El Salvador when he visited there last summer, helped raise the $50,000, which was transferred to the Center for Development Policy. The center hired the former official as a consultant. 'He's Risking His Life' Defending the payment to the former official, Mr. Gomez said: ''He's risking his life and he deserves some help in protecting himself and his family. Fifty thousand dollars is a joke. Half is going to pay his taxes. How long can a man with a family and no income live on $30,000?'' Mr. Villers said he urged Mr. Tsongas to met with the Salvadoran and introduce him to other members of Congress. Mr. Tsongas, who went to El Salvador with Mr. Villers, is a director of the Villers Foundation, a philanthropic organization established by Mr. Villers and his wife to aid the elderly. Mr. Villers said he also suggested to Mr. Gomez and Mr. Cameron that they approach The New York Times and CBS News. Warren Hoge, the foreign editor of The Times, said he did not learn about the payment to the former official until the beginning of last week. He said that before publication of the article on March 3, he asked Mr. Cameron what motivation or inducement the former official had to speak out. Mr. Hoge said that Mr. Cameron did not mention the financial arrangement. Mr. Cameron said on Thursday that he could not recall whether he mentioned the money to Mr. Hoge, but he added: ''At no time did I make any effort to conceal any information. It would have been silly to hide anything.'' Mr. Cameron did tell a reporter from The Times about the money on March 9, and Mr. White volunteered the same information in a meeting with a reporter on March 14, although neither man specified the amount. Mr. Cameron and Mr. Gomez provided details about the financial arrangement earlier this week."
