"A former Salvadoran military official who recently implicated high-ranking Salvadoran officials and civilians in acts of terrorism was promised $50,000 by a group of critics of Reagan Administration policies in Central America if he would speak out. The group also helped arrange for the former official to meet with reporters and members of Congress. The former official has received $29,500 of the $50,000, which was promised as a ''security net'' to help support him and move his family from El Salvador, according to those involved in the effort. The rest of the money, they said, will pay taxes on the income and defray the expenses of organizing his appearance. The group that raised the money and arranged for the former official to give interviews to The New York Times, NBC News and CBS News includes a former United States Ambassador to El Salvador, aides to three Democratic members of Congress, a Salvadoran exile leader and a Massachusetts businessman. Two Massachusetts Democrats, Senator Paul E. Tsongas and Representative James M. Shannon, while not members of the group, helped it by trying to bring the accusations of the former official to the attention of colleagues in Congress. Who Was Implicated In an article published in The New York Times on March 3, the former official, who asked to remain anonymous for fear of reprisal, said that Salvadoran military and civilian leaders were involved in organizing and directing death squads. Among those he implicated in terrorist acts were former Defense Minister Jose Guillermo Garcia, Col. Nicolas Carranza, the chief of the Treasury police, and Roberto d'Aubuisson, a leading candidate in El Salvador's presidential election Sunday. It was not possible to obtain independent verification of his accusations and most of those he implicated denied any involvement in the death squads. Other people familiar with the Salvadoran and his allegations said he had been known for his differences with Mr. d'Aubuisson. They said he might also be motivated by indications that young people close to him, possibly including relatives, might be developing ties to terror groups. The Goal of the Effort The people who arranged for the former official to talk said they hoped his account of officially sanctioned violence in El Salvador would change United States policy. One of them, Philippe Villers, the president of Automatix Inc., a Burlington, Mass., manufacturer of robot systems, said, ''I believe what we're doing in Central America violates the principles on which this nation was founded, including a respect for human rights.'' In justifying their effort, members of the group said that the Government frequently made information and sources available to reporters and that these sources included people who had quietly received money from the Central Intelligence Agency or other agencies.  In 1980, for example, the C.I.A. planned to bring Afghan guerrillas to testify at the United Nations about the Soviet intervention in their country, according to former intellgence officials. The plan was dropped because of prohibitions against C.I.A. operations in the United States. President Reagan lifted the prohibitions in 1981. Money to pay the former Salvadoran official, according to Mr. Villers, was funneled through the Center for Development Policy, a Washington research organization that has opposed Administration policy in Central America. An Anonymous Donor The largest single donation, $35,000, was provided by an American businessman long involved in the Democratic Party and the American Civil Liberties Union. He asked to remain anonymous for fear of reprisals. The former Salvadoran official was hired by the Center for Development Policy to work on a project about the death squads. The project is headed by Robert E. White, who was the American Ambassador to El Salvador from 1979 to 1981. Mr. White, a critic of the Administration's policies in Latin America, was among those who helped arrange for the former official to talk."
