"The State Department is attempting, once again, to persuade Congress that the human rights situation in El Salvador is improving. The department has a new approach: It involves discounting the deaths of hapless peasants killed by the army in its campaign to quash the guerrillas. No one who cares about human rights can accept this sinister accounting. Seizing upon the Spanish word ''masas,'' which is used by the Salvadoran guerrillas in a propagandistic effort to suggest that the masses support them, the State Department is claiming that peasants who support the guerrillas account for most of the civilian deaths now being recorded by human rights groups. A cable from the United States Embassy in San Salvador, which the State Department is circulating on Capitol Hill, says that such peasants' ''intermingling with and support of the armed insurgents makes them something more than innocent civilian bystanders.'' Accordingly, the cable seems to suggest, killing them is legitimate. If the deaths of all those labeled in this way by the State Department were subtracted from the figures recorded by human rights groups, it might indeed appear that the human rights situation is improving. So far, the principal body to challenge the State Department is the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador. The archdiocese's human rights office, Tutela Legal, takes testimony from the families of victims and from eyewitnesses to killings. It does not use the word 'masas': It contends that whether civilians support the guerrillas is generally not something that can be determined after they are dead - and, anyway, that it is immaterial. What matters, according to the archdiocese, is the circumstances in which they are killed. If they take part in hostilities, their deaths are not recorded as human rights violations. If they are unfortunate enough to get killed in the crossfire, their deaths are not recorded as human rights violations. But if testimony from witnesses makes it clear that they died in deliberate attacks on civilians, or that they died because the Salvadoran armed forces use free-fire tactics in guerrilla-controlled zones and conflict zones, their deaths are recorded as human rights violations. The Salvadoran guerrillas may call them 'masas' - and the State Department may call them 'masas' - but to the archdiocese their deaths are violations of human rights. Until late 1983, the State Department tried to exculpate the Salvadoran armed forces of responsibility for civilian deaths by blaming most killings on ''right-wing death squads.'' Following the arrival of Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering in San Salvador in the fall of 1983, the State Department finally began to acknowledge that these death squads were linked to the Salvadoran armed forces, and it began to exert significant pressure to stop their killings. A high point of this effort was a Dec. 11 meeting in San Salvador between Vice President Bush and 31 top Salvdoran military commanders, in which Mr. Bush threatened that United States military aid would end unless death squad activity were curbed. The effects have been felt, making it clearer than ever that the death squads are connected to the security forces. According to the archdiocese, killings and ''disappearances'' by nonuniformed death squads have now declined to a dozen or so a week - a staggering number in any rational setting but the lowest weekly figure in more than four years in El Salvador. On the other hand, deliberate killings of civilian noncombatants by the uniformed armed forces have not been affected. These continue to run at about 100 each week.  Plainly, it will be very difficult to curb the uniformed forces. Many of their killings involve efforts to punish civilians who are suspected of having provided food to the guerrillas - willingly or not - or who may have failed to disclose the guerrillas' whereabouts to the armed forces. To use the familiar metaphor of guerrilla warfare, the Salvadoran armed forces have been unable to catch the fish, so they are trying to dry up the ocean. Killing civilians is one way that they hope to prevail.  By contending that only death squad killings count as human rights violations and that anything goes as far as killings by the uniformed forces of El Salvador are concerned, the State Department may succeed in persuading Congress that the human rights situation has improved. In the process, however, it will put the United States into the position of apologist before the world for yet another set of Salvadoran horrors."
