"Former President Leopoldo Galtieri was put under arrest tonight by Argentina's highest military court in an investigation into his conduct of the 1982 war with Britain over the Falkland Islands, a court spokesman said. General Galtieri, the former army commander and head of the military junta that ordered Argentina's invasion of the South Atlantic islands on April 2, 1982, was taken to the main army base at Campo de Mayo on the outskirts of Buenos Aires after testifying for eight hours today, the spokesman said. He said the former President would remain under arrest until the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces reached a decision on his legal situation. A British task force recaptured the islands on June 14, 1982, after bitter fighting in which about 1,000 men died. Last Nov. 18 the military junta that supervised Argentina's return to democracy ordered General Galtieri court-martialed, along with several other senior officers, on charges of mishandling the conflict. The courts-martial were recommended by an official panel that conducted an inquiry into the war. The panel was headed by a retired general, Benjamin Rattenbach. A secret part of the Rattenbach report, obtained by the press, recommended that General Galtieri and the former navy commander, Adm. Jorge Anaya, be tried on several charges, including one punishable by the death sentence. The death penalty is applicable to an officer who, in time of war, refuses a feasible request for help from a military unit in danger. General Galtieri, along with Admiral Anaya and the former air force chief, Brig. Basilio Lami Dozo, made up the junta that ruled Argentina from December 1981 to June 1982. The three are also being court-martialed by the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces on charges of authorizing systematic abuses of human rights under military rule. Argentina's new elected President, Raul Alfonsin, ordered the council to court-martial all three juntas that ruled Argentina from 1976 to 1982 on charges of ordering the kidnapping, torture and murder of up to 30,000 people during a campaign against leftist guerrillas. The council has questioned all nine former junta members but has not ordered any arrests in connection with these proceedings. Citizens have filed more than 30 lawsuits against military commanders for the slayings and disappearances of relatives. Former President Reynaldo Bignone and several other officers have been indicted and jailed without bail. Another former junta member, Adm. Emilio Massera, has been in jail since June on charges of withholding evidence in the case of a missing business man in which he is a suspect. A retired admiral, Ruben Chamorro, who was arrested Sunday after a return from self-imposed exile in South Africa, remained in detention today.  He is being investigating for suspected links with rightist death squads."
