"The Presidential election in El Salvador to be held on Sunday will not be free or democratic. Nor will it contribute to a resolution of the main problems of the country - war, military dictatorship, widespread violations of human rights, economic and political crises and foreign intervention. The election will take place in a setting very different from that of a United States election. It is being held in the midst of a full-scale war that now spreads over most of the country. More than 45,000 people, almost 1 percent of the population, have been killed in the last four years by death squads and the armed forces. Hundreds of people are under arrest or have disappeared. All independent press and broadcasting has been destroyed by the army and the oligarchy. What is left of the press is controlled by the hard right and the armed forces. Free campaigns and political organizing are impossible in this atmosphere of repression, fear and death. For members of the opposition to run for office is to run for the cemetery. In this atmosphere, we in the opposition feel that an election is premature. We believe that peace, justice, respect for human rights and the foundations of a democratic system - the conditions for free and democratic elections - must come first. This is precisely what we want and what we are proposing. Thereafter, we would be more than ready to hold general elections. The approaching election, far from improving the political situation, has instead already worsened it. A victory of any of the three candidates running for president could easily lead to a coup d'etat. It could also lead to the formation of a weaker and less stable Government than the present one, a government that will have less support and more contradictions, both nationally and internationally. The decision to hold this election was made in Washington, by Washington and for Washington. Its out come can only prolong the war and make it necessary to increase United States military aid. It may even be used to justify direct military intervention by the United States to save what will be called ''a democratically elected government.'' We in the opposition believe that there is a better way. On Feb. 9, in Mexico City, the Salvadoran opposition announced a detailed proposal for a broad-based provisional government that would lead to general elections within a relatively short time. We in the opposition are committed to elections through negotiations. We would hope in this way to bring about the first Salvadoran elections that are not abused by the oligarchy and the army. Only in this way can we help Salvadorans to regain faith in the electoral process.  The options are clear - a military or a political solution, intervention or power-sharing. The best option for El Salvador, and for the United States, is a broad-based coalition government that would achieve peace, lay the grounds for a democratic system and lead to free elections. Thus we hope to guarantee stability for El Salvador and security for the hemisphere - including the United States.  We in the Salvadoran opposition are sharply aware of the economic and geopolitical realities that we would face when and if we achieve a share of power. This, and our experience within the left - in our coalition of armed and unarmed groups - has contributed to a maturing of the Salvadoran opposition. It has shaped our ideology - our wish for a democratic and nonaligned revolution. We want a new relationship with the United States - a relationship based on mutual respect and cooperation. We believe that such ties are necessary and possible. Yet so far Washington has been indifferent to our goal - hostile to real democracy and nonalignment. It continues to support dictatorships, to manipulate and destroy democracies, to disrupt Latin Americans' progress toward independence and nonalignment. The United States has shown that it is hostile to revolution in a small neighboring country - no matter what the nature and ideology of that revolution. This, of course, makes it all the more difficult - if not impossible - for us to achieve our hopes for a democratic and nonaligned revolution. Instead, the United States should be helping to create space for peace, democracy and nonalignment. As Frank Church, the former Senator, recently said about the United States: ''We must learn to live with revolutions.'' We in the Salvadoran opposition are facing our responsibilities. It is time for both the Administration and Congress to face theirs. Otherwise, we may soon be caught up in a large and violent confrontation that we would all certainly prefer to avoid."
