"The State Department said today that the Carter Administration had not relaxed its concern over human rights violations in Argentina but was making efforts in other areas to improve relations with that country. ''There has been no shift in our policy with respect to human rights in Argentina,'' said Hodding Carter 3d, the department spokesman. ''There has been no lessening of the commitment to that subject.'' Mr. Carter had been asked about news reports that the Administration had decided to seek an improvement in relations with Argentina's military Government and that as a result, Patricia M.  Derian planned to resign as Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. Mr. Carter, who is married to Mrs. Derian, said that the quote attributed to her was ''about two weeks old,'' that she had no intention of resigning and that ''she is confident there is no change in our human rights policy toward Argentina.'' Some reports indicated that Mrs. Derian had been particularly incensed by proposals by the Defense Department and the State Department's Bureau of Inter-American Affairs for a resumption of United States military assistance to Argentina. Amendment Prohibits Aid Mr. Carter pointed out that military aid to Argentina was prohibited by an amendment to the Foreign Assistance Act of 1978 by Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and the late Senator Hubert H. Humphrey of Minnesota, both Democrats. ''I know of no commitments about any resumption of military aid,'' Mr. Carter said. Other State Department officials said the Administration had no plan to seek repeal of the Humphrey-Kennedy amendment. Mr. Carter said the Administration was ''continually searching for better ways to puruse the objectives of U.S. foreign policy in relation to Argentina and to improve relations.'' ''In that connection,'' he said, ''there have been a number of visits by U.S. officials to Argentina to conduct a dialogue on a number of matters of mutual concern, and that will undoubtedly continue. But that attempt is not one with which Mrs. Derian is in disagreement.'' One visitor was Lieut. Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, who made an unsuccessful effort in January to persuade Argentina not to sell enough grain to the Soviet Union to make up for the partial embargo imposed by President Carter after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. Other visitors were Gerard C. Smith, a special representative of President Carter for nuclear nonproliferation, in March, and Luther C. Hodges, Under Secretary of Commerce, in February."
