"After hearing most members of a key House committee threaten to curtail aid to El Salvador, Secretary of State George P. Shultz exploded in apparent exasperation today, saying that the legislators wanted to ''walk away'' from a vital area of the world ''because there are problems.'' ''I really don't understand you people,'' Mr. Shultz said after being lectured at length by several members of the House Appropriations Subcomittee for Foreign Operations on human rights violations in El Salvador, which they said were not being ended despite Mr. Shultz's assertion that progress had been achieved recently. ''Here we have an area, right next to us, which a cross section of Americans on a bipartisan commission have studied carefully, really worked at it, have concluded is in the vital interests of the United States,'' he said of the panel headed by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger. ''There are problems there,'' he said. ''We all know that. What you're telling me is that because there are problems, let's walk away.'' Several committee members were critical of the Administration's Lebanon policy and reproved Mr. Shultz for having complained before a Senate committee last week that the debate in Congress on the deployment of the Marines had undercut the American efforts in Lebanon. Mr. Shultz stood by his view that the War Powers Act, which limits the President's actions in sending troops overseas, was not a good law. He promised to make a fuller recommendation later.Mr. Shultz's mood seemed to swing back and forth during the hearing. In exchanges with Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of Wisconsin, and Representative Sidney R. Yates, Democrat of Illinois, he was contentious, his voice rising in argument as he and the Congressmen tried to make their points at the same time. At one point Chairman Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, had to gavel the hearing to order. But at other times Mr. Shultz joked with Mr. Long or made observations in subdued tones. On a major issue between Congress and President Reagan, whether the Administration should be required to certify that El Salvador has made progress in human rights before it receives aid, he suggested a compromise was possible. Last November President Reagan vetoed a certification bill, saying that the Administration would seek improved human rights in El Salvador but without a Congressional mandate. The sentiment in the House Foreign Affairs Committee is for mandated certification and Mr. Shultz said today that ''we should find a reasonable way by which we can agree on'' the issue. At one point Mr. Obey said he would not vote for any economic or military aid to El Salvador until the Administration demonstrated it had a policy with ''some chance of success.'' He said he feared that having lacked a coherent Lebanon policy, the Administration was facing disaster too in El Salvador. Mr. Obey also said that the Administration should encourage negotiations between the Government and the rebels in El Salvador. Mr. Shultz said he was ''distressed'' to hear Mr. Obey say he would not vote for aid to El Salvador and advocate allowing the insurgents ''to shoot their way into the Government.'' ''I'd urge you to recognize that negotiating for power sharing is better than in the end losing it all,'' Mr. Obey replied. Article Is Discussed Mr. Yates, reading from a New York Times interview last week with a former Salvadoran military officer who said that the death squad activities in his country involved many present and former officials, said that not enough was being done to bring reforms to El Salvador. Mr. Shultz, while agreeing that human rights violations were a problem, questioned Mr. Yates's use of an article based on anonymous informants to make such serious charges. ''I don't dismiss the article,'' Mr. Yates said, because it was ''understandable'' why the former officer might want to remain anonymous. ''I don't dismiss newspaper articles either,'' Mr. Shultz replied. ''But I do think if you are going to make a statement in a forum like this about the guilt of somebody for murder, you ought to have more behind it than the article in The New York Times.'' ''Well, that's as close to the truth as we can get,'' Mr. Yates said. ''The rationalizations that have been coming out of the Administration haven't been adequate.'' Drop in Deaths Noted Mr. Shultz, trying to summarize the Administration's view of the human rights situation, said: ''If the point is that the system of justice is wholly inadquate in El Salvador, and has been for some time, and that there has been gross violation of human rights, including death squad activities, well, we all know that is true. Now the question is whether something is being done about it, and whether any progress is being made, and I think the answer to those questions is yes.'' He said that the number of civilian deaths had dropped considerably in recent months and that those accused of killing four American churchwomen four years ago were scheduled to come to trial in May."
