"The organizations that Philippe Villers, president of Automatix Inc., belongs to are not the usual chambers of commerce and business groups associated with a corporate executive. Mr. Villers is a member of such groups as Amnesty International, a human rights organization, and the American Civil Liberties Union. ''In college, he was known as the left winger's left winger,'' said a securities analyst, Nathanael B. Greene Jr. of Hambrecht & Quist in San Francisco. But Mr. Villers, in addition to being a man for many progressive causes, is also every inch the corporate executive, perhaps one of the more successful ones in the high-technology sector. ''He is a brilliant thinker, always five steps ahead of you,'' Mr. Greene said. His company, which went public a year ago, is a leader in robotics technology. Critic of Reagan Policies Mr. Villers's name (pronounced VILL-ers) has been in the news in the last few days because he was one of several critics of President Reagan's Central American policies who helped arrange to have a former Salvadoran military official's story told in Washington. The official, who was not named, accused high-ranking Salvadoran officials of terrorism. Later, it was learned that the people who brought the official to Washington had promised him $50,000 as a ''security net'' to provide temporary support for his family. Mr. Villers said yesterday that, for his part, he had been invited to help see that the man's ''information was properly shared with the American people.'' Mr. Villers, who lives in Concord, Mass., said he had been in Central America last summer with two Massachusetts Democrats, Senator Paul E. Tsongas and Representative James M. Shannon. ''I was shocked at what I saw,'' he said, ''I had for the first time in my life seen a terrorist government in operation.'' Mr. Villers, who is 48 years old, made his business reputation as a founder and a vice president of Computervision of Bedford, Mass., a leading company in the discipline of computer-aided design and computer-aided manufacturing, known as CAD/CAM. Started Automatix in '80 He was at Computervision from 1969 to 1980, when he left to begin Automatix Inc. of Bellerica, Mass., a robotics company that went public a year ago. ''From a technology point of view,'' said Mr. Greene, who follows computer-integrated manufacturing technology. ''they are in my opinion the leading company in the business.'' Mr. Villers's 11.5 percent holding at Computervision made him a millionaire many times over. Last year, he and his wife, Katherine, established the Villers Foundation with $40 million. Mr. Villers said yesterday that the purpose of the foundation, based in Washington, was ''to change the status of elders in our society'' and to give them a ''fuller, more meaningful participation.'' Mr. Villers was born in Paris and came to the United States with his family as a refugee when he was 5. He went to Harvard for his bachelor's degree and to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for his master's degree. Sued by Computervision While he was at Computervision, Mr. Villers headed a project to identify growth areas for the company, Mr. Greene said. Mr. Villers suggested that the company go into robotics. The proposal was turned down, Mr. Greene said, and Mr. Villers left the company ''to do it himself'' by forming Automatix, taking several Computervision employees with him. Later, Computervision sued him, saying he had used confidential company information to start his new company, but a jury found otherwise and Mr. Villers won. Automatix's strategy, Mr. Greene said, is to concentrate on the electronics and the software aspects of robotics and buy the robot itself from other companies. He said Mr. Villers's ''principal skill is being the seer and knowing where to go two or three years before the time you need to be there.'' A Loss in 1983 Nevertheless, Automatix has snagged itself on accounting procedures for recording sales. It had to restate its 1983 quarterly results and shift sales into 1984, Mr. Villers said, and the company will be forced to post a loss for 1983. ''This was precipitated by the discovery by auditors of falsification of a document in our Paris office,'' Mr. Villers said. The company's European sales manager, since dismissed, was said to have deleted some conditions of a sales contract before forwarding it to the main office. Despite these developments, Mr. Villers is confident. ''Our sales in 1982 were $8 million,'' he said, ''and not very far from double last year, and will again double or so this coming year. We are doing very well and look forward to a very successful year.''"
