"The Senate Appropriations Committee today approved President Reagan's requests for urgent extra military aid for El Salvador and for Nicaraguan rebels. In votes that broke mainly along party lines, the Republican-controlled committee reversed earlier decisions and approved $93 million in emergency aid for the Salvadoran armed forces and $21 million for the Central Intelligence Agency to use to help anti-Sandinista forces. The aid requests now go before the full Senate where, with the issue of Central America seeming to grow more contentious with each legislative day, the outlook is unclear. A Warning of Shortages The Administration argued before the Appropriations Committee that the Salvadoran Government, which is battling a leftist insurgency, was in danger of running out of guns and ammunition just when its armed forces were trying to provide security for a national election. The Administration also warned that the efforts of the guerrillas opposing the leftist Nicaraguan Government would dry up without a new injection of C.I.A. aid. Committee members expressed considerable reservations about arms aid to El Salvador, with many asserting that the Government there had not done enough to eliminate human rights abuses. There was less argument about the aid for the Nicaraguan rebels, but the committee said only $7 million of the $21 million could be spent immediately, with the remainder to be doled out later. The committee also ordered that the new aid for El Salvador could not be spent unless President Reagan certified every two months that progress was being made on human rights. The Administration did not want that condition, which has been attached in various forms to previous Central American aid packages and which some Democrats argued should have been made even more restrictive. Nevertheless, the White House expressed pleasure with today's overall committee action. ''We're pleased,'' said Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman. ''This is an important part of the President's program for democracy in Central America.'' But despite today's committee victories, the Administration still is not assured of final Congressional approval of its requests, which were in the form of amendments attached to a bill that would provide $150 million in food aid for parts of Africa stricken by drought. Several Democratic members of the committee vowed to try to strip the amendments from the bill when it reaches the Senate floor. Further, the food aid bill approved by the House contains no amendments on arms aid. ''The final decision will not be made in this committee,'' conceded Senator Mark O. Hatfield, the Oregon Republican who heads the panel. Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska, a member of the committee and the Senate majority whip, said he expected the Senate to approve the aid package. But he said he did not know whether the Senate and House measures could then be reconciled satisfactorily. The Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., called the action by the Senate panel ''a lousy, mean thing to do.'' ''It was a mean thing to do to those Africans over there,'' the Massachusetts Democrat said. ''There is no question that there will be terrific opposition to it on the floor over here.'' The House Foreign Affairs Committee, meanwhile, deferred action on a compromise version of the measure embraced by most Democrats on the panel, which would deny emergency aid for El Salvador this fiscal year and place strict conditions on aid in the 1985 fiscal year that begins Oct. 1. Last week, with no advance notice, the Administration tried to persuade the Senate Appropriations Committee to write the Central America aid measures into a bill that would provide funds to help the poor pay their heating bills. The committee refused, with many members charging that the Administration had tried to shortcut the usual Congressional process by failing, first, to win approval of the Nicaraguan aid proposal from the Senate Intelligence Committee. The Administration then backtracked and put the request before the Intelligence Committee, which approved it Tuesday. In the Appropriation Committee's action last week, the key vote was 15 to 14. Today, the key vote was 16 to 13. ''Last week was a very different circumstance,'' Senator Warren B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire, said in explaining the change. ''We were given no notice. The Intelligence Committee was completely bypassed.'' Today's key vote come on a futile effort by Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, to defer action on the emergency aid still longer.  ''I think the Congress of the United States is entitled to know what the urgency is all about,'' he said. In the past, he asserted, some United States aid has gone to elements of the Salvadoran armed forces that had little respect for the human rights of civilians. He called for assurances that there would be no such diversions in the future. After the vote, Senator Inouye said he would seek on the Senate floor to trim the $93 million in aid to El Salvador to $49 million."
