"United States officials say the Reagan Administration is seriously concerned that the outcome of next month's presidential election in El Salvador could jeopardize rather than strengthen democratic rule there. While the Administration publicly describes the election, scheduled for March 25, as an important step toward democracy, it is said to be privately concerned that the balloting might lead to a confrontation between political leaders on the left and right that could set the stage for a military coup. Those points were made by the officials as Secretary of State George P. Shultz arrived here today after spending eight hours in El Salvador on Tuesday. Rightist's Candidacy of Concern The officials said the focus of the Administration's concern was the presidential candidacy of Roberto d'Aubuisson, the leader of the far-right National Republican Alliance. The Administration was said to feel that a victory by him could polarize El Salvador's civilian leadership and produce an upswing in human rights abuses by security forces and right-wing death squads. And that, the officials said, could increase already widespread opposition in Congress to expanding United States military aid to El Salvador to fight the leftist guerrillas. The officials said the Administration was also concerned over the candidacy of Jose Napoleon Duarte, who represents the Christian Democratic Party and is expected to be Mr. d'Aubuisson's strongest opponent. Military Reportedly Suspicious The informants said the Salvadoran military viewed him with suspicion and might move to overthrow a Duarte Government on the ground that it would make too many concessions to guerrillas to end the civil war. In elections in 1982 for a Constituent Assembly, Mr. Duarte's party, which at the time was favored by United States officials, won 40 percent of the popular vote and Mr. d'Aubuisson's party 29 percent. Administration officials said today that a runoff election between the two men this year could split the country and lead to increased violence. The dark horse candidate, and the one who is said to be receiving at least indirect support from the United States Embassy in El Salvador, is Francisco Jose Guerrero from the National Conciliation Party. Mr. Guerrero is viewed by United States officials as a conservative who could appeal to both the business class and the military. Administration 'in a Bind' Describing the Reagan Administration as ''in a bind'' over the elections, one official said that if it pushed hard for an end to human rights abuses and death squads, ''d'Aubuisson and others may try to turn that pressure into a voter backlash'' against the United States. He said Mr.  d'Aubuission had already adopted an anti-American tone in his campaigning. But if the Administration lessens the pressure, the official said, ''Congress will never give us the money we need.'' Senior officials traveling with Mr. Shultz have said the Administration plans to ask Congress for $170 million in additional military assistance in the current fiscal year. Congress has already approved $64.8 million. At a news conference on Tuesday in San Salvador at the beginning of an eight-day trip to Latin America, Secretary Shultz tried to navigate between the conflicting interests. He condemned far-right terror and death squad activities but said the Salvadoran authorities had made progress toward reducing such violence. He emphasized that the United States was neutral on the coming elections. When asked if Washington would be concerned about a d'Aubuisson victory, he said, ''We believe in the democratic process and we believe in fair and open elections, and we believe that under those circumstances you accept the verdict, whatever it may be, of the people who do the voting.'' Direct Accusations Avoided Mr. Shultz and his aides have not wavered from that position in public. But officials said in private interviews that a d'Aubuisson victory could create major problems. They said Mr. d'Aubuisson and the issues of death squad activity were linked in a way that constrains American policy. They noted that Administration officials had spoken bluntly to Salvadoran leaders about the death squad problem, and demanded that the Salvadoran Government take action against squad leaders and organizers, including at least one security official closely linked to Mr. d'Aubuisson. But the informants said the United States officials had avoided direct accusations about Mr. d'Aubuisson himself. Officials said they were aware of reports connecting Mr. d'Aubuisson to the death squads, including a cablegram sent to the State Department in 1981 by the United States Embassy in El Salvador. The State Department refused Mr. d'Aubuisson a visa to visit the United States last November, citing American national interests."
