"The Reagan Administration has agreed to sell Guatemala $2 million worth of spare parts for its aging fleet of United States-made military helicopters, the State Department said today. It would be the first official sale of military equipment to Guatemala since 1977, when the military Government refused assistance after the Carter Administration strongly criticized it for human rights abuses. A department spokesman asserted that since the sale would be a cash transaction, it would not be a violation of a Congressional ban on military assistance to Guatemala. Copters Built in 1950's Guatemala's Foreign Minister, Fernando Andrade Diaz-Duran, announced the sale after a meeting with United States Ambassador Frederick L. Chapin in Guatemala on Saturday. The Foreign Minister said the parts were needed to restore Guatemala's six UH1-H helicopters, built in the late 1950's, so they could be used against leftist rebels. Last November, Congress voted to cut off nearly all military and economic aid, distinct from direct cash sales, to Guatemala's military Government after the slayings of three Guatemalan teachers who were working for an American-financed project. A small amount of economic assistance is continuing. Opposed by Kissinger Panel L. Craig Johnstone, director of the State Department's Office of Central American Affairs, said that because the helicopter-parts sale was for cash, it did not fall under the category of foreign aid and was therefore not a violation of the Congressional ban. ''We approved the sales last January,'' he said, ''and this is just a reiteration of our willingness.'' Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland, who is chairman of the House subcommittee on Western Hemispheric Affairs, said it is ''a mistake to sell military equipment to Guatemala at this time.'' Mr. Barnes said that the Kissinger commission's report on Central America advised against such sales, and that the Administration's actions were ''in clear contradiction of commission findings and Congressional views.'' Security Forces Assailed The report of the commission headed by Henry A. Kissinger urged that Guatemala be subject to the same type of human rights certification that El Salvador must meet. The Kissinger panel's report said that though there are about 2,500 rebels fighting the Government in Guatemala, ''an even more serious obstacle in terms of ultimate containment of armed revolt in Guatemala is the brutal behavior of the security forces.'' ''In the cities,'' the report continues, ''they have murdered those even suspected of dissent.'' The sale of American military equipment through the Pentagon's foreign aid program was banned by the Carter Administration in 1978 for repeated Government human rights violations. In 1980, having seen no improvement in the human rights area, the Carter Administration prohibited even commercial military sales to Guatemala. Last January, however, the Reagan Administration lifted the embargo on military sales and applauded the Government of Gen. Efrain Rios Montt for ''significant steps'' taken to improve Guatemala's human rights picture. General Rios Montt was overthrown last August by Gen. Oscar Mejia Victores, who has a close relationship with the Reagan Administration. According to a Western intelligence official, Guatemala has received several consignments of military parts from the United States since the November Congressional ban. The official said the parts had been ordered before the ban was imposed. The shipments of parts first came to light in November, when rebels made public documents they said they had found in the wreckage of a Guatemalan Air Force helicopter. Amnesty International lists Guatemala as one of the most notorious violators of human rights in the world. Last Tuesday, Americas Watch, a New York-based human rights monitoring group, said that killings and disappearances of civilians in Guatemala's cities had increased under General Mejia Victores."
