"Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that El Salvador had made ''considerable'' progress in recent months in curbing right-wing death squad activity and improving its human rights record. But he made clear that additional improvements were needed to gain Congressional approval for increased American aid. Before arriving here for an eight- hour visit, his first to El Salvador and the first stop in an eight-day trip to Latin America, Mr. Shultz said, ''It must be clear to everybody that without a reasonably functioning judicial system and basically democratic system, the ability of the United States to maintain the level of support that we want is going to be very seriously damaged.'' Additional $170 Million Sought Senior officials traveling with Mr. Shultz said the Administration would ask Congress for $170 million in additional military aid for El Salvador in the current fiscal year. Congress has already approved $64.8 million. The officials said the supplemental aid request would probably be sent to Congress this week. They added that the Administration planned to seek $220 million in military aid for El Salvador in the fiscal year 1985, which begins in October.  Mr. Shultz told Salvadoran leaders that the substantial increases, which were recommended earlier this month by President Reagan's bipartisan commission on Central America, would not be approved by Congress unless human rights abuses were reduced, American officials said. 'We Oppose Terror' In arrival remarks at the San Salvador civilian airport, which was cleared of commercial aircraft and heavily guarded by army troops, Mr. Shultz said: ''The tactics of terror, whether totalitarian terror or whether it is death squad terror, have no place in a democracy. We oppose terror in all its forms.'' El Salvador's Foreign Minister, Fidel Chavez Mena, welcomed Mr. Shultz in the hot midday sun by thanking the Reagan Administration for its ''decisive support'' in the war against leftist guerrillas. Mr. Shultz met at lunch with the six candidates for president in the elections scheduled for March, including Roberto d'Aubuisson, the leader of the far-right National Republican Alliance. Mr. d'Aubuisson has been linked in United States intelligence reports to death squad activity. After the meeting, when asked at a news conference if the United States would be concerned if Mr. d'Aubuisson were elected in March, Mr. Shultz said, ''We believe in the democratic process and we believe in fair and open elections and we believe that under those circumstances you accept the verdict, whatever it may be, of the people who do the voting.'' Mr. Shultz also met with Alvaro Magana, the Provisional President. In a lunchen toast at the presidential residence in the hills overlooking San Salvador, Mr. Shultz said, ''Death squads and terror have no place in a democracy, and I mince no words in saying it here or anywhere else.'' He added: ''The armed forces must act with discipline in defense of the Constitution. And the judicial system must prove its capacity to cope with the terrorist acts of extremists of the right or left.'' Mr. Shultz went on to Venezuela after his visit here. Before returning to Washington next week, he will also visit Brazil, Grenada and Barbados. Mr. Shultz, speaking to reporters aboard his Air Force plane on the flight to El Salvador from Washington, said the Salvadoran Government had ''done quite a number of things'' to curb death squad activity since Vice President Bush visited El Salvador in December. During his visit, Mr. Bush demanded that the Salvadoran Government take steps to eliminate the death squads or face a reduction or cutoff in American aid. 'Some Definite Movement' ''The death squad activity and things of that sort have become a matter for public condemnation by key leaders in both the political and military sphere,'' Mr. Shultz said, ''so there has been some definite movement.'' United States diplomats, Salvadoran Government officials and human rights activists here say the number of people who have disappeared after having been abducted has dropped in recent weeks. But there is disagreement over the significance of the development. There is also uncertainty about whether critical statements by the Reagan Administration and Salvadoran officials about the country's human rights situation are responsible for the recent change. Says Action Has Been Taken Mr. Shultz said Salvadoran authorities had taken action against individuals suspected of participating in death squad activities, including some identified by Mr. Bush and other American officials. ''Not all the names, but a goodly portion,'' Mr. Shultz said, adding, ''It's basically a pretty good record though, a very good record.'' Mr. Shultz said the United States also saw progress in several pending criminal cases, including the prosecution of former national guardsmen accused of killing four American churchwomen in 1979. ''I think all of these together add up to a very considerable amount of movement since December,'' he said. Mr. Shultz said improvement in human rights ''is good for the people of El Salvador.'' He added, ''Who wants to live in a country where murder takes place on such a scale and isn't punished?''  Soviet Comments on Trip MOSCOW, Jan. 31 (AP) - The official Soviet press agency Tass said today that Secretary of State Shultz's trip to Central America was intended to further mobilize ''the more reactionary forces'' of the region. The press agency noted that Mr. Shultz would be the Administration's first high-ranking official to visit Grenada since the United States invaded the Caribbean island in October. ''He intends,'' Tass said, ''to discuss with the puppets from the inglorious 'caretaker government' of that country ways for the further enslavement of the Grenadian people and for turning the island into an outpost of U.S. acts of aggression in the Caribbean.'' ''Washington intends to oppress not only the Grenadians, but also the peoples of other Caribbean states,'' it said. ''This is how one can view the fact that during his visit to Barbados Shultz will discuss with the heads of the pro- American regimes the establishment of a 'regional security force.' '' Tass said the force would be a ''mobile bandit grouping of puppet troops.'' The press agency also said Mr. Shultz would discuss military aid with the ''bloodstained regime'' in El Salvador. It made no mention of the Reagan Administration's statement that Mr. Shultz would warn El Salvador that aid could be jeopardized if rightist death squads are not checked."
