"President Reagan sent legislation to Congress today calling for a fourfold increase in military aid for El Salvador this year. Under the proposal, the aid would not be conditional on ''demonstrated progress'' by El Salvador in ending human rights abuses. Mr. Reagan's special commission on Central America had recommended that the aid be tied to progress in human rights. That had been required under Congressional legislation vetoed last fall by Mr. Reagan. Salvador Aid at $243.5 Million The increase proposed today would bring United States military assistance to El Salvador to $243.5 million this year. The aid request came as the White House announced that Harry W. Schlaudeman, a 57-year-old career diplomat, would be the new special ambassador to Central America, replacing Richard B. Stone, who is resigning at the end of the month. Mr. Schlaudeman has been Ambassador to Venezuela, Agrentina and Peru. (Page 4.) In a covering letter, President Reagan told Congress he would insure that military aid to Central American countries ''is provided under conditions necessary to foster human rights and political and economic development.'' Pledge to Consult Congress He pledged that the Administration would ''consult with members of the Congress to make certain that our assistance is used fairly and effectively.'' But Mr. Reagan's pledge appeared to fall short of the commission's recommendations and the provisions of a bill passed last week by the House of Representatives requiring concrete certification of progress on elections, human rights, curbing right-wing death squads and a more effective judicial system in El Salvador. Democrats in Congress predicted a major political battle on both the amounts of aid being proposed for El Salvador and the rest of Central America and on the conditions required for military aid. ''They're going to have a hard time getting Congress to approve more aid for Central America, particularily military aid, when we have a big deficit in an election year and the President is calling for all kinds of cuts in domestic programs,'' said Representative Clarence D. Long of Maryland, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Foreign Operations. ''And the language they have on human rights is just a fantasy. Nobody trusts it.'' Three other provisions of the five- year aid package submitted today could also become controversial. One would seek $10 million in 1985 for military aid to the military Government in Guatemala, which was banned by Congress in 1979 from receiving military aid because of human rights abuses. The Central American commission recommended military aid for Guatemala provided it met the kind of human rights conditions spelled out for El Salvador.  A second controversial provision would seek an exclusion for Central America from a ban on United States aid to national police forces imposed by Congress in the early 1970's. Mr. Reagan's proposal would permit a $20 million expenditure in El Salvador to help train prosecutors, corrections officers and others involved in the administration of justice. The third proposal would give the President authority to use some United States aid money to compensate landowers whose property is confiscated under land redistribution programs. Commission's Recommendations Overall, the legislative package submitted today embraces the broad program recommended by the commission on Central America. It urged a five-year, $8.4 billion economic aid program to the Central American nations, as well as $515 million in additional military aid to the region for this year and next. This would be on top of $114 million in military aid and $430 million in economic aid for Central America already voted by Congress for the fiscal year 1984, which began last Oct. 1. ''We face an inescapable reality: we must come to the support of our neighbors,'' the President said in his letter. ''The democratic elements in Central America need our help. For them to overcome the problems of accumulated historical inequities and immediate armed threats will take time, effort, and resources. We must support those efforts.'' Seeks Supplemental Aid For El Salvador alone, the legislation submitted today seeks supplemental military aid of $178.7 million for 1984 in addition to $64.8 million already voted by Congress. For the fiscal year 1985, starting Oct. 1, the Administration wants $132.5 million in military aid for El Salvador. The Administration's proposal also calls for boosting economic aid to El Salvador this year from $198.6 million to $332.6 million and recommends $341 million for 1985."
