"Three human-rights monitoring groups asserted yesterday that political killings, disappearances, and torture had increased in Honduras in the last year. In a 71-page report, issued in New York by the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights, Americas Watch and the Washington Office on Latin America, charged that the Honduran Department of National Investigation was responsible for many of the abuses. A six-member delegation from the three groups, which visited Honduras for 10 days last October, called on the United States Government to denounce the abuses publicly and to pressure the Honduran Government to quickly investigate abuses that occur. ''The United States has failed to exert meaningful pressure on the military to curb mounting abuses,'' the report asserted. ''At best, it has remained silent when questions of human rights violations are raised. At worst, it has defended military abuses.'' Cause for Comparable Concern' Although the report conceded that the abuses in Honduras were not as numerous or as flagrant as those in El Salvador or Guatemala, it concluded that ''they are cause for comparable concern.'' The delegation said it had documented 49 civilian deaths in the first half of 1983 that were attributable to Government forces, 13 of which it said were the result of political motives. It also said that 28 people disappeared last year, with no evidence that the cases were being investigated. A State Department spokesman, Paula Kuzmich, said the department had not yet reviewed the report and could not comment on its assertions. She added that the State Department's own reports on human-rights abuses around the world would be issued today. Members of the delegation included Drew Days, former Assistant Attorney General and now a professor at Yale, Professor William Crotty of Northwestern University, Michael Posner of the lawyers committee, Juan Mendez of Americas Watch and Leyda Barbieri of the Washington Office. The group met with Honduran Government officials and human rights leaders, as well as church leaders, lawyers, doctors and businessmen."
