"One of Latin America's most illustrious political prisoners is a retired general and former presidential candidate who has spent more than nine years in this capital's central jail. The prisoner, Gen. Liber Seregni, who lost at the head of a center-left coalition in Uruguay's last free election in 1971, is still scorned by his military colleagues as a traitor for having opposed their takeover of Uruguay in 1973. World leaders, among them King Juan Carlos of Spain and Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden, have asked for the 67-year-old general's freedom. Uruguay's three legally authorized parties - the centrist Colorados and Nationals and the conservative Civic Union - have demanded his release. His name has increasingly been chanted in antimilitary protests here in the last six months. But the Government of Gen. Gregorio Alvarez has refused to respond. When Bishop Carlos Parteli, head of the Roman Catholic Church in Uruguay, blessed General Seregni on Christmas Eve, it was the first time a person other than the general's immediate family or lawyers had been allowed to visit him in eight years. Lives in a Cramped Cell The general has lived most of the last decade in a cramped cell without sunlight. He gets little exercise, and his access to mail, news and visitors is tightly restricted. ''It is the uncertainty that is horribly trying,'' his wife, Lily Lerena de Seregni, 67, said in an interview. ''You never know if each night might be the last of his life.'' The plight of political prisoners has been a major human rights issue in this small ranching country of 2.9 million people tucked between Brazil and Argentina on South America's Atlantic coast. According to the Government, more than 5,000 Uruguayans have been jailed by military courts for politically related offenses since 1972. But, the Government says, the number of Uruguayan prisoners held today for politically related crimes is down to 830. According to the newly formed Uruguayan Human Rights Commission and to Amnesty International and Western diplomats, at least 300 of these prisoners had no connection with violence or the leftist Tupamaro guerrillas active in the early 1970's, 'Prisoners of Conscience' Most of these ''prisoners of conscience,'' the sources said, were convicted for organizing protests or for being activists in forbidden leftist parties like the Communists, even though most of the Communists were loathed by the Tupamaros for being nonviolent.  Seventeen people are reported by human rights groups to have disappeared here in the 1970's, compared with more than 6,000 under the military in Argentina. One of the most celebrated Communists in jail is an internationally recognized mathematician and former Congressman, Jose Luis Massera. Scientists from around the world, including more than a dozen Nobel laureates, have petitioned for the release of the former professor, who is 68 years old. The Government insists it holds no political prisoners. ''They are all terrorists or subversives,'' Labor Minister Nestor Bolentini, a retired colonel, said in an interview. Physical torture in Uruguayan prisons is said to be rare. But according to former prisoners, visiting rights, exercise, mail and reading privileges are regularly suspended arbitrarily. Prisoners are often said to be roused at night to keep them from sleeping. Terms of up to three months of solitary confinement in an underground dungeon known as ''the island'' are reportedly common. Tupamaro Leaders Held An exception concerns nine former Tupamaro leaders, including Raul Sendic, the chief Tupamaro leader. They are generally described as ''hostages,'' since the military has implied they will be killed if Tupamaro violence resumes. The nine are rotated among army barracks in the interior, where they are often beaten, according to the Human Rights Commission and Western diplomats. Torture is also reported to be common during army interrogations before jailing. After 25 Communist youths were arrested and charged in June with organizing illegal protests, the Uruguayan Peace and Justice Service, a human rights group, said many of them were tortured with electric prods. After making the report, the human rights group was outlawed by President Alvarez. General Seregni, one of the youngest Uruguayan officers ever to be promoted to general, resigned in 1969 in protest against army suppression of the Tupamaros. He maintained that the task should be left to the police. The son of an Italian grade-school teacher, the general was politically a Colorado, a party of urban European immigrants who helped turn Uruguay into an advanced social welfare state, with free medicine and retirement at age 50 for many workers. General Won 18% of Vote But disillusioned by the crackdown against guerrillas and internal party strife, he accepted an invitation to run for president by the Broad Front, a coalition of Christian Democrats, Socialists, Communists and centrist dissidents. He won 18 percent of the vote. He was arrested in 1973 during a silent protest two weeks after the military takeover. He was paroled 16 months later, then re-arrested after a series of bomb attacks. This time, the Government pressed such charges as subversive association, showing disrespect for the president in his 1971 campaign and usurping municipal authority by organizing a volunteer street cleanup. ''The charges are ridiculous,'' said one of his attorneys, Hector Clavijo, a member of the National Party executive committee. Military officials acknowledge that General Seregni had no connection with terrorists. But the real issue to them is said to be that one of their own had associated with the Communists. ''It is an eminently military matter,'' Mr. Bolentini, the Labor Minister, said. The prosecution asked for 10 years' imprisonment for General Seregni; the judge, a colonel, sentenced him to 14. A four-year-old appeal to the Supreme Military Tribunal has yet to receive a response. Meanwhile, the general has already served more than half his term and is said to be eligible for parole. Television, but No Newspapers According to his wife and his lawyer, General Seregni shares a set of tiny cells with 10 other former officers who joined the Broad Front. Newspapers are prohibited, but he watches censored Uruguayan television. Twice a week, his wife said, he is allowed to exercise for an hour in a sunless patio. His wife is allowed to visit for an hour twice a week, and she sends him food daily. He is studying mathematics and languages, among them English. He reads prodigiously, his wife said, and is now in the midst of Toynbee's works and a book on the Brazilian economy. ''He is trying to keep mentally lucid,'' she said. She said he had told her that he wanted to go back into politics once released. She said he would seek to clear his name but had no desire to punish his jailers. ''What good would payment do?'' she said. ''Violence only brings more violence.''"
