"The Reagan Administration has certified to Congress that despite ''serious human rights abuses'' Haiti should continue to receive American foreign aid, the State Department said today. Under current law Haiti could not receive more aid unless President Reagan certified that it was taking steps to curb illegal emigration to the United States, was cooperating with American aid programs and was ''implementing political reforms essential for the development of democracy, including the establishment of political parties, free elections and freedom of the press.'' According to a State Department spokesman, Secretary of State George P. Shultz signed the certification papers on Monday and they were sent to Congress without publicity the next day. Essentially, the justification says Haiti has been very cooperative in meeting the first two criteria - halting illegal emigrants and helping with American aid programs. But the document, an official said, recognized that ''serious human rights abuses continue to exist in Haiti.'' 'Concerted Effort' on Rights ''However, on balance, the Government of Haiti is making a concerted effort to improve the human rights situation in that country,'' the department said. The Haitian Embassy had no comment on the Administration action. Haiti has long had grave human rights problems, with many members of the political opposition being forced into exile or subject to repression at home. The department also said today that Haiti was ''the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere,'' with a per capita income of less than $300 a year and with 77 percent of the population below ''an absolute poverty level of $150 per year.'' In the 1983 fiscal year, Haiti received $43.5 million in aid, and in the current fiscal year it is to receive $44.65 million. The department said the Administration would ask $54.05 million for the 1985 fiscal year, which begins Oct. 1. Except for $450,000 for military training of some Haitian officers, the aid is all economic. The Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights wrote to Mr. Shultz that the Haitian Government ''has not met the standards set forth by Congress as a prerequisite for aid.'' The executive director of the group, Michael Posner, wrote that providing aid would ''make a mockery'' of the law. More Progress Sought ''We have advised the Congress that the Government of Haiti is providing full cooperation to the United States on halting illegal emigration to the United States,'' the State Department said. It said Haiti's help ''is very much appreciated.'' ''We have also advised the Congress that the Government of Haiti cooperates fully in implementing United States development, food and economic assistance programs,'' it said. ''We recognize that serious human rights abuses continue to exist in Haiti,'' it continued. ''However, on balance the Government of Haiti is making a concerted effort to improve the human rights situation in that country.'' ''This determination does not mean that the Government of Haiti does not still need to make considerably more progress in the areas of human rights and democratization,'' the department said. ''The justification sent to Congress specifically notes problems in conjunction with the 1983 municipal elections and states that the Government of Haiti needs to make progress in the area of press freedom and political association, including the right of political parties to participate in elections,'' it said. ''We will continue to make known to the Government of Haiti our concern that there be progress in these areas,'' the department said. Rights Report Due Soon By coincidence, the State Department also sent to Congress last week the annual review of human rights practices around the world, a document that traditionally causes strains in relations with friendly countries that have serious defects in human rights. It is to be made public next week. The legislation calling for certification for Haiti was put into legislation for the current fiscal year that is known as the continuing resolution. That law also made continued aid to El Salvador conditional upon the President's certification that El Salvador's land redistribution program was proceeding. The State Department made that certification last month. There is also a requirement for certification that a verdict will be reached in the trial of those accused of killing four American churchwomen in 1980. The Administration has been unable to provide that document because the court process in El Salvador has been dragging on for months without a conclusion in sight. Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland and chairman of the House subcommittee on Western Hemisphere affairs, said tonight that his information ''would not suggest that certification is possible at this time.'' He added, ''A number of my colleagues are extremely concerned about the certification,'' which he said ''comes on the basis of almost no improvement'' in human rights in Haiti. ''It's difficult to make the case that the Government of Haiti is making any significant progress.'' Mr. Barnes also said, ''It's very unfortunate if these certifications become a mockery of reality.'' He said he understood the Administration's desire to resume aid but ''the law is the law'' and there are ''too many cases'' in which the Administration is ignoring ''Congressional restraints.'' Mr. Barnes said his staff was notified about 10 days ago of the intention to certify.  optional bites: --last sentence --4th graph from end, starting ''There is also a requirement. . .''"
