"Weeks of prosecutions and public denunciations of the military's human rights abuses have produced an uneasy mood in the armed forces, according to officers as well as civilians close to the institution. ''If this aggression against the armed forces continues,'' a senior army officer politically well connected in the armed forces said in an interview, ''it is going to provoke a confrontation.'' The two-month-old elected Government of President Raul Alfonsin has begun courts-martial of nine former junta members and a police chief on charges of ordering thousands of assassinations and widespread torture in an antiterrorist campaign in the 1970's. Citizens aided by human rights groups have also filed more than 30 lawsuits against commanders for the slayings and disappearances of relatives. Former President Reynaldo B. Bignone and several other officers have been indicted and jailed without bail. Retired generals who once commanded fear are taunted and cursed by crowds outside courthouses. When Maj. Gen. Luciano Mendendez, who is retired and is an outspoken hard-liner, was called to appear before a Congressional subcommittee for criticizing the prosecutions, several hundred people pelted his car with bricks, breaking the windows. What the Military Dislikes The military generally respects Mr. Alfonsin and is prepared to abide by the rulings of the courts and court-martial boards, the officers and civilians said. What unsettles the armed forces, they said, is what they see as a campaign by some human rights groups and others to stir up antimilitary feelings. They said this was being done by making what they said were unproven charges and playing up such emotion-packed evidence of the antiterrorism campaign as the thousands of bodies being uncovered in unmarked graves. ''Alfonsin is acting thoughtfully for the good of the country,'' the senior officer said, ''but there are subversive elements at work that he cannot control.'' The officer, a well-educated, direct- talking man, spoke in the house of a civilian on the understanding that his name would not be used because of a Government ban on political statements by military officers. He said he had spent more than 30 years in uniform, once trained in the United States and commanded a regiment in the antiterrorist fight. He cited the possibility of acts of terrorism by underground military groups as possible military responses, although he and the others interviewed stressed that no such acts were being considered now. They said the military, which left office in disgrace over the defeat by Britain in the 1982 Falkland Islands war, is intent on professionalizing itself and on serving the new democracy the way the military does in other Western democracies. Steps for Civilian Control Trying to bring the military under firm civilian control, Mr. Alfonsin has moved to reduce its political power while at the same time defending it from public vengeance. In a far-reaching move Feb. 6, Mr. Alfonsin appointed civilian directors over Fabricaciones Militares, ending 50 years of military control of a state industrial complex that is the nation's largest employer. The complex, which includes domestic airlines and produces an extensive array of nonmilitary goods ranging from paint to plow disks, has long been a source of political patronage run by the military. Mr. Alfonsin also has retired several generals and admirals and appointed democratic loyalists as staff chiefs under civilian secretaries. Deep military budget and manpower cuts are promised. Eliminating much of the military's judicial power, the Government pushed through laws in the two houses of Congress this month that take away the power of military courts to try civilians or servicemen for crimes and protect most servicemen who followed orders. They give the military a chance to cleanse itself by calling for military trials of servicemen for human-rights abuses, although all the courts-martial must be reviewed by civilian courts. Vengeance Ruled Out Sharply critical of the attacks outside court, Mr. Alfonsin repeated in a recent news conference, ''The Government will not put up with vengefulness of any kind.'' Officers in the three services have said in interviews that the juntas failed politically by letting corruption and the repression of terrorism get out of hand while becoming too arrogant in power themselves. But they defended most of their military actions, saying that leftist terrorists brought the country to the the brink of disintegration in the mid-1970's with hundreds of assassinations and widespread bombing and kidnapping. The 1976 coup overthrowing Isabel Martinez de Peron was popular. ''Someone had to dirty their hands,'' the senior army officer said, ''and we took it to be a national cause. If the methods we used were not the best, perhaps it's because there were no others.'' The number of military men directly involved in torture and assassinations, however, was small, so most officers today feel they can avoid jail, the informants said. But they demand the prosecutions end fast. ''Some have to be punished so that all don't look guilty,'' a retired navy captain said."
