"The House of Representatives approved legislation today that would again make improvements in human rights in El Salvador a condition of United States military aid.tary aid. The bill, which now goes to the Senate, is similar to one President Reagan vetoed last year on the ground that it was too restrictive. It would require the Administration to certify every six months that the Salvadoran Government was making a ''concerted and significant'' effort to guarantee human rights, was eliminating right-wing death squads and was making progress in land redistribution. It would also make further military aid conditional on attempts by the Salvadoran Government to negotiate with the left-wing guerrillas and on serious investigations into the slaying of several Americans. 'Pocket Veto' Kills Bill Legislation requiring such certification for aid to El Salvador was in effect throughout most of 1982 and 1983. It expired last Sept. 30, however, leading Congress to approve the measure that Mr. Reagan subsequently vetoed by refusing to sign it once Congress had adjourned and left town, a so-called pocket veto. The House action today came on a voice vote after Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland and chairman of the Subcommittee on Central America, argued that while the bill would require progress in human rights by the Salvadoran Government it would not be so restrictive that ''the ultimate Jeffersonian democracy'' would have to be achieved in order for the flow of aid to continue. The bill's supporters contended that more than 35,000 civilians had been slain in El Salvador over the last five years in incidents that were not combat-related. ''We must act where the President has not acted,'' said Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts. Rights Violations Conceded Should the measure come to a vote in the Senate, it will probably pass easily since last year's certification bill was approved by both the House and the Senate without a single dissent. But the White House has indicated it would prefer to avoid another head-to- head confrontation with Congress over the certification issue, so an effort may be made to head off a Senate vote. The White House would prefer some means besides mandatory certification to convince Congress of human rights progress in Central America. Administration officials concede serious violations of human rights have taken place in El Salvador. But they contend that Congress has taken an ''all or nothing'' approach that is both bad policy and bad diplomacy. Former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, testifying on Central America before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee today, predicted ''a serious effort'' by the Administration to reach a compromise on the certification issue. It would be ''a grave error'' not to seek a compromise, he added. Mr. Kissinger went before the committee to discuss the five-year, $8.4 billion aid package recently recommended by the panel he headed, known as the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America. It was appointed by President Reagan in an effort to find a common ground for a new policy toward Central America. The commission also recommended that certification be a condition for continued aid. But in a footnote to the report, Mr. Kissinger warned that the conditions should not be so restrictive that the aid flow would be slowed to the point that rebel forces could overthrow the Salvadoran Government. 'Vigorous' Effort Urged Some critics of the commission report have contended that it put too much emphasis on military solutions and not enough on negotiations. Mr. Kissinger countered today that, in fact, the report called for a ''vigorous'' negotiating effort. But he went on to warn of dire consequences if the basic recommendations of the commission were not adopted. ''If these recommendations are not carried out in the economical and social programs,'' he said, ''a sense of hopelessness and drift will continue. If they are not carried out in the political and security fields, I think we might find ourselves with a situation that, for the first time in our history, the Western Hemisphere becomes a security problem for the United States.'' In another Central America development on Capitol Hill today, Senator Jim Sasser, a Tennessee Democrat, said on returning from a trip to the region that human rights violations also were a major problem in Guatemala and that the United States should avoid joint military exercises with that country's armed forces. ''Guatemala has the worst civil rights record of any country in South America,'' Mr. Sasser declared. He said it would hurt the ''image'' of the United States to go through with plans to let Guatemala take part in American-Honduran military exercises now under way in Honduras. Mr. Sasser also called for an investigation by the General Accounting Office, a Congressional agency, into the extent of a United States military buildup in Honduras. He said it appeared to him that American forces were putting in ''a semipermanent infrastucture,'' and he warned that such extensive military emphasis might have a ''chilling effect'' on the development of democracy in Guatemala. ''I don't believe the American public and members of Congress have any idea how extensive it is,'' he said. ''I thought we had learned our lesson about piecemeal backing into situations around the world. The Administration is trying to go into South America through the back door without consulting the Congress or the American people. We want the Administration to tell us why they are doing this.''"
