"A Presidential mission with a bipartisan makeup flew to El Salvador today to investigate the killing of four American women missionaries that has caused a crisis in United States relations with the military-backed Salvadoran Government. The delegation, led by William D. Rogers, a former Under Secretary of State for Henry A. Kissinger, and William G. Bowdler, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, has been asked by President Carter to determine if El Salvador's security forces were involved in the deaths of three Roman Catholic nuns and a social worker. The Administration halted new military or economic aid to El Salvador yesterday until the circumstances of the murders are clarified. Security forces and leftist guerrillas are engaged in an armed struggle that has taken at least 8,000 lives this year. Mr. Rogers, a Washington lawyer, said in a telephone interview before leaving that the purpose of the mission went beyond the investigation of the killings and was also directed at studying ''what kind of government can exercise power effectively now in El Salvador's conditions.'' After the mission arrived in El Salvador, it was reported to have met with the United States Ambassador, Robert E. White, and with Salvadoran Government officials. Mr. Rogers said the mission would report to President Carter and that Richard V. Allen, the senior foreign policy adviser to President-elect Ronald Reagan ''will be kept informed at every step.'' ''This mission is being carried out in a spirit of bipartisanship,'' Mr. Rogers said.  President Carter's policies toward Central America, including the Panama Canal Treaty, the withdrawal of support for the Nicaraguan regime of Anastasio Somoza before it was deposed and suspension of military aid to regimes accused of persistent violations of human rights, have been sharply criticized by Mr. Reagan and his conservative supporters. The threat that El Salvador and Guatemala could follow the example of Nicaragua, where the military-backed regime was overthrown by a revolutionary movement led by Marxist guerrillas, has sharpened the debate over what military aid should be supplied by the United States to regimes that are accused of major human rights violations. Conservative Republicans, such as Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, say that military aid to governments that are ''fighting Communism'' should not be cut off because of allegations of human rights violations. ---- U.S. Mission Arrives Special to the New York Times SAN SALVADOR, Dec. 6 - The United States investigating mission arrived here today and quickly met with Ambassdor Robert E. White and Salvadoran Government officials. Although the subject of the discussions was not disclosed, the meeting fueled speculation that the purpose o f the American mission was as much to arrange a political settlement to the near civil war here as to investigate the killings of the fo ur American women. Meanwhile, it was reported that Col. Arnaldo Majano, considered one of the most liberal members of the ruling civilian-military junta, had returned to El Salvador from Panama. Colonelk Majano left El Salvador last week on the day that five leftist political leaders were assassinated."
