"A former Argentine serviceman described today how he had participated in one of the many undercover military units that kidnapped, tortured and assassinated thousands of Argentines in the mid-1970's. ''There were things you could not bear, things that were unimaginable,'' he said. ''But the tingling I feel on my skin, almost seven years later, still makes me feel sick.'' The former serviceman, Raul David Vilarino, who was a naval petty officer, two weeks ago became the first individual to say publicly that he participated in the campaign against leftist subversion. Officials here said his declaration might have represented the beginning of an unraveling of the common front that the military and the police have maintained in denying that they were involved in human rights abuses. Others Starting to Testify Members of a commission set up by Argentina's new civilian President, Raul Alfonsin, to investigate the more than 6,000 people who disappeared in the antiterrorism campaign said several other former servicemen who participated in the campaign had recently started giving private testimony to the commission. Defense Ministry spokesmen said in interviews that Mr. Vilarino appeared to have belonged to a navy antiterrorist unit, but that they could not confirm it as fact because no lists were kept of unit members. They said they could not confirm statements that he had witnessed numerous torture sessions, including one involving a pregnant woman, but added that they had been taking testimony from him all week and they had no reason to doubt his report. ''It still makes me throw up,'' Mr. Vilarino said of the torture of the pregnant woman. ''But at least that establishes to me that I am still a human being.'' Military Court to Get Testimony The Defense Ministry said his testimony would be turned over to the Supreme Military Tribunal, the military's top court, which will decide whether to court-martial the many officers and servicemen whom Mr.  Vilarino has named as ordering or participating in executions and torture. They added that they had assigned him four bodyguards. The military stepped down last month after nearly eight years in power, and the Government has already started courts-martial for nine former junta members and a police chief for ordering the widespread abuses. Many other military leaders are being tried in civilian courts in privately brought suits. Mr. Vilarino first made his accusations in an interview published in a magazine, La Semana Medica, two weeks ago. He said that he had first taken his story to Federal Court clerks here last month, but that the bureaucratic obstacles he met moved him to go to the magazine. No one has come forward to deny any of his assertions.  Mr. Vilarino, 35 years old, a muscular, barrel-chested man, was interviewed today in the coffee shop of a hotel here where he has been staying. It was his first detailed interview since the Semana articles. Mr. Vilarino, who resigned from the navy in 1980 and is now a maintenance supervisor for an oil company, said that between 1975 and 1978 he was a member of a three-man squad called a patota; that is a slang word that means street gang. He said the squad worked out of the Navy Mechanics School. The school, which has a campus of colonnaded buildings on the edge of a park in Buenos Aires, was infamous as a torture center at which hundreds of people were killed, according to survivors and now Mr. Vilarino. Mr. Vilarino denied that he had directly participated in any assassinations or torture outside of beating people who resisted during kidnapping attempts. He said his squad was assigned to kidnapping terrorist suspects and that it had picked up some 200 people. The kidnapping victims were turned over to others for interrogation and, frequently, torture. Mr. Vilarino said he had often witnessed the torture. He Accuses Admiral He said he took direct orders from the school's director, Vice Adm. Ruben Chamorro, who according to the Defense Ministry is today the Argentine naval attache in South Africa. Mr. Vilarino said he saw Admiral Chamorro personally interrogate, electrically torture and execute several people suspected of being terrorist leaders. He said senior noncommissioned officers usually carried out the torture and not low-ranking servicemen. He said doctors supervised and often applied the most sickening torture techniques. Few were allowed to survive once selected for the torture chamber, he said. He said that until he was reassigned in 1978 to be a maintenance instructor, he watched the torture get progressively worse. 'Drinking Cups of Coffee' ''Sadism became normal, like drinking added cups of coffee,'' he said. ''Everyone in the groups were psychologically abnormal. They had to be to do things like applying electric prods and cutting off fingers. The concept was to break the people psychologically, but the interrogations became secondary. Some could take more, some less, but the interest became the end, and almost all would die.'' Mr. Vilarino said he did not know why he was selected for the naval unit. He said he was abandoned by his parents as a child and was raised by an aunt. He joined the navy at age 15. The dead bodies were taken away nightly, he said, often to be buried in cemeteries. Others were taken to a landfill for a navy sporting grounds or were dumped by plane at sea. He said that, in retrospect, many of those killed were probably innocent. He said the squads were not anti-Semitic, as come critics have charged, or even antileftist. He said they saw themselves as fighting guerrillas and lost sight of the ends for the means. Timerman Files Suit BUENOS AIRES, Jan. 27 (Reuters) - Jacobo Timerman, the former Argentine newspaper publisher, filed a lawsuit today against former President Jorge Rafael Videla for having jailed him for 23 months without trial in 1977- 79. His suit also named Gens. Ramon Camps and Guillermo Suarez Mason. General Camps, a former police chief of Buenos Aires Province whom Mr. Timerman formally identified as one of his torturers, was arrested last week on orders from President Alfonsin."
