"At the heart of the problem in El Salvador there is a fact of life that has existed, unchanged, for generations. A small minority exercises power by brute force. When election results challenge that fact, the results are overturned. When individuals are suspected of wanting to challenge it, they are killed. Death squads are only the latest expression of the social reality. When the United States opposes revolution in El Salvador, how does it deal with that reality? Oppression encourages revolution. So do we first try to reduce the oppression, then get the security situation in hand? Or do we go all-out for military success on the theory that it will make reform possible? Which comes first? That is the crucial question addressed by the report of the Kissinger commission on Central America. And the answer it gives is surprising, considering the conservative cast of the membership. The report comes down squarely for the proposition that the U.S. should continue helping the Salvadoran military only if minimum decencies begin to be observed. ''Military aid,'' the report says, should be ''made contingent upon demonstrated progress toward free elections; freedom of association; the establishment of the rule of law and an effective judicial system; and the termination of the activities of the so- called death squads, as well as vigorous action against those guilty of crimes.'' That passage is underlined in the report. It is followed by a sentence, also given emphasis, that is a stinging reproach to the Reagan Administration: ''These conditions should be seriously enforced.'' The Administration has made a mockery of past conditions for aid to El Salvador. Faced with unending butchery by the death squads, it repeatedly certified that human rights in El Salvador were improving. Then, when control of the death squads by high officials became a public scandal, President Reagan pocket-vetoed legislation continuing the certification requirement. The commission not only called for ''serious'' enforcement of conditions from now on. It said the United States should stop harboring members of the Salvadoran oligarchy who managed death squad activities from Florida. And it said the same tough policy on human rights should govern any U.S. aid to Guatemala, upon whose murderous dictators the Reagan Administration has smiled. The significance of the commission's advice on this central issue is made clear by the prickly reaction of the President - and of Henry Kissinger. Even before the report was issued, a White House spokesman said Mr. Reagan was ''inclined'' to ignore its call for conditions on aid. And Mr. Kissinger, joined by two other conservative commissioners, appended a wonderfully characteristic ''note'' to the point in the report. ''Conditionality,'' Mr. Kissinger said, should not be interpreted ''in a manner that leads to a Marxist- Leninist victory in El Salvador.'' In other words security concerns come first after all. Mr. Kissinger's lack of enthusiasm for human rights requirements is an old story. He thinks it is sissy idealism to care about torture and murder when geopolitical conflicts are being waged. But a man with his reputation for shrewdness might have been expected to see that in El Salvador concern for basic decencies is not only a matter of maintaining American ideals but a practical necessity. For the last three years the United States Government has put security concerns ahead of promoting change in the brutal political culture of El Salvador. That is a substantial experiment, and the results are in. It doesn't work. The Reagan-Kissinger approach in El Salvador has not solved either the security problem or the internal oppression. That is an understatement. The military situation is worse now than it has been for a long time. Specific demands by high U.S. officials for action against known death squad leaders have produced scant results, and to this day none of the killers have been convicted. The lesson is as the commission majority saw it: If there is any hope for a viable non-Communist El Salvador, it must begin with internal reform. But even if the U.S. Government adopted that policy - a very big if - would the holders of power believe it and accept change? Representative Michael Barnes, an influential House Democrat on Latin affairs and a counselor to the commission, noted that its general emphasis was on military solutions in Central America. ''We can't tell the Salvadoran military that freedom in our hemisphere depends on their winning the war,'' he said, ''and say they need as much as $400 million to do it, and then expect them to believe that we will cut off the money unless they change the nature of their society.''"
