"In a bleak world there is one place to look these days for good news of freedom and human decency. That is to Argentina, where years of mass torture and murder under a military junta have given way to a regime of democracy and law. The new Argentine President, Raul Alfonsin, has transformed the mood of that tormented country, whose great potential has been dissipated over the decades by political folly. He is undoing the cover-up of official crimes and prosecuting the generals responsible for them. The press is free, and people need no longer fear the knock at the door - and disappearance into secret prisons and death. In all this there is a bitter reproach to the Government of the United States, and especially to its neo-conservative ideologists. For they gave sympathy and support to the Argentine gangsters in uniform. It was a sordid policy and a stupid one. One of the very first foreign dignitaries invited to Washington by the Reagan Administration after it took office was the general about to assume the presidency of Argentina. Secretary of State Alexander Haig told Congress that the Administration favored the resumption of arms sales, which had been cut off because of Argentine human rights atrocities.  He explained that Argentina shared our values. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the U.S. representative at the United Nations, went down to meet the military leaders of Argentina. That was an appropriate symbol, because the policy of smiling upon them represented perfectly her doctrine that America should be more tolerant of ''authoritarian'' regimes than of ''totalitarian,'' meaning Communist. Then came an amazing episode, still hard to believe. On April 2, 1982, the evening after Argentina invaded the Falkland Islands, Ambassador Kirkpatrick attended a dinner in her honor at the Argentine Embassy in Washington. Not even naked external aggression stopped her smiling at the men responsible for so much butchery inside Argentina.  Fortunately, Margaret Thatcher took a different view. She sent British forces to the Falklands. The Reagan Administration came down on the British side, albeit rather lamely and, reportedly, over Mrs. Kirkpatrick's objection. With courage and the help of Argentine military ineptitude, Britain won the war. The Argentine junta, its prestige shattered, slunk out of power.  To the end the Reagan Administration displayed its insensitivity to human rights in Argentina. Last April, in a final effort to avoid responsibility, the junta issued a document saying that all the kidnappings and killings had been ''acts of service'' against subversion. America's European allies deplored the outrageous statement; the Pope spoke out. The State Department waited nearly three weeks and then issued a whimpering paragraph of ''disappointment.'' The depressing record of Reagan policy is not just history. It is a present obstacle to the United States doing what it ought to be doing in relation to Argentina - and other countries. President Alfonsin, for all his political success so far, is hardly secure. There is danger that Argentines, who have lurched so often from one political extreme to another, may overdo their zeal to punish all who were involved in the thousands of ''disappearances'' and deaths. If the process goes far below the responsible military and police chiefs, to ordinary soldiers, chaos and another coup are possible. In the circumstances it would be helpful if President Alfonsin could rely on a close and understanding relationship with the United States. But how can he rely on a Government that dealt so benignly with the savagers of his country? Washington should, too, be helping transitions to democracy in Chile and Uruguay, whose military tyrants are quaking at the Alfonsin example. But who could expect leadership of that kind from the Reagan Administration? One of the electrifying events in the new Argentine democracy has been the return of Jacobo Timerman, the editor who was tortured and held in secret prisons. Reading about him, I thought of what may have been the single most disgusting act of the American right in recent years: the campaign, led by the guru of the neo-conservatives, Irving Kristol, to smear this victim of the Argentine fascists. Jacobo Timerman is alive today only because Jimmy Carter and his Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, Patt Derian, intervened strongly to save him. The Carter policy on human rights saved others, too, and Argentines have not forgotten. The Argentine story has a straightforward moral for the United States. This country is at its most effective abroad when its diplomacy coincides with its ideals. Of all people, we should be arguing for the value that President Alfonsin embraces: freedom under law."
