"The euphoria here that followed Ronald Reagan's Presidential victory a year ago has given way to confusion, disappointment and anger. Elated at the defeat of Jimmy Carter, Government supporters celebrated with bursts of automatic weapons, fireworks and a marimba band in front of the United States Embassy. They blamed Mr. Carter's human rights policy for the leftist revolution that led to the overthrow of Gen. Anastasio Somoza Debayle in Nicaragua and for serious guerrilla threats to the governments here and in El Salvador. ''There were those who expected guns, helicopters, ammunition on Jan. 21,'' said a civic leader who devotes much time to trying to improve United States-Guatemalan relations. But so strained are those relations now that an influential Congressional aide who visited here recently said that he could more easily get appointments with governmnent officials if he did not request them through the United States Embassy. And embassy officials, aware of the Guatemalan Government's sensitivity to foreign criticism, will not discuss the situation except on ''deepest background,'' refusing even to permit attribution to a ''foreign diplomat.'' U.S. Seeks Better Relations The Reagan Administration is struggling to improve relations with Guatemala, which is the most populous Central American country and which has turned up evidence of oil fields that could supply 10 percent of the United States needs. This year, as a good-will gesture, the Reagan Administration sent military jeeps and trucks and quietly assured the regime that more military aid would be forthcoming if it improved its human rights record. Lieut. Gen. Vernon A. Walters, a former deputy director of Central Intelligence who is now an Ambassador at Large, has been dispatched here twice in the past six months. State Department officials have said that his plea to the Government to end human rights abuses was curtly rejected. Also ignored were urgings by the United States that a military man not run for President in the elections scheduled for next March since it would be easier for the United States to send aid to a civilian government. But a coalition of the army and the ruling parties chose as their candidate Gen. Anibal Guevara, who resigned as Minister of Defense to campaign. United States economic and military assistance to tiny El Salvador, Guatemala's neighbor to the south, will be about $250 million next year. Guatemala will receive less than $6 million. This confuses and angers Guatemalans, who believe that the guerrillas here are being helped by Cuba and present as great a threat to the stability of their country as do those in El Salvador. 'Contradictions' in U.S. Policies ''There are contradictions in the policies and declarations of Secretary of State Alexander Haig,'' Hector Napoleon Alfaro, a member of the Guatemalan legislature, said in a speech in October. Mr.  Alfaro charged that Mr. Haig applied different criteria to the situation in El Salvador than to that in Guatemala where ''we have not seen any plan of collaboration.'' The Reagan Administration has said that it wants to send military aid to Guatemala, but military sales to countries engaged in ''gross and consistent'' violation of human rights are prohibited. Amnesty International, the London-based human rights organization, has said that ''a long-established Government program of murder and torture in Guatemala is run from an annex of the National Palace, under the direct control of President Romeo Lucas Garcia.'' According to an Evangelical Church leader here, more than 11,000 civilians have been killed this year. Another religious worker put the number of killings at 35 to 40 a day. Entire Indian villages have been wiped out by soldiers taking revenge after guerrilla ambushes. Scores of People Flee Figures on the political killings maintained by the State Department are considerably lower - an average of about 300 a month recently - but still high enough for officials to know that any military aid request would not get through Congress. Several religious and political leaders here have said that Government persecution is greater in Guatemala than in El Salvador.  Scores of priests and community workers have fled, usually after being warned that their work with the Indians and peasants is supporting the revolution. A businesswoman who helps Indians develop markets for their woven goods says that when the Indians come to the capital now they look at the ground and say they know nothing when asked what is happening in the countryside. Priests and businessmen nervously caution a reporter to make all his calls from a public telephone, which they say is more difficult to tap, and not to identify himself or go to their offices. Foreign correspondents cannot enter the country if their names are on a list kept at the airport. ''We have no options'' in Guatemala, a senior State Department official said several weeks ago. A solution along the lines of El Salvador where, with encouragement from the United States, moderate military offices deposed a rightist dictator then formed a government with civilians was not possible in Guatemala, he explained, because there are not a sufficient number of junior officers disturbed by the practices of the colonels and generals. In addition, more than 130 Christian Democratic leaders and active party members have been killed here in the past several years, most of them since the Christian Democrats joined the Government in El Salvador. A former high Government official here charged recently that the Government and right-wing groups had killed moderate politicians precisely so that what has happened in El Salvador could not occur here."
