"State Department officials said today that El Salvador appeared to be carrying out its pledge to curb the activities of death squads. As a result, they said, the Administration intends to live up to its pledge to the Salvadorans to ask Congress for a substantial increase in assistance. In addition, officials said the State Department was drafting a special report on the political, economic and military situation in El Salvador that would be given to Congress on Jan. 16. The report is intended to replace the certification previously mandated by Congress that progress was being made on human rights in El Salvador. On Nov. 30 Mr. Reagan vetoed a bill renewing the demand for such certifications. More Aid May Be Sought A State Department official said ''it is not an unfair assumption'' that the Administration will make a supplemental aid request for the fiscal year 1984, which ends next Sept. 30, and seek an increase in the fiscal year 1985. But he said no final decision had been made either on the requests or on the amounts. Before Congress adjourned in November, it approved $120 million in economic assistance and $64.8 million in military aid for El Salvador. But of the military aid, only $45 million is available until Mr. Reagan can certify that no steps have been taken to cut back on the land redistribution program in El Salvador and that a verdict can be expected in the trial of those accused of the slayings of four American churchwomen in 1980. Aid for El Salvador will also be addressed in the report of the special Presidential commission on Central America, headed by former Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger, which is expected to be given to Mr. Reagan on Jan. 10. Land Program Extended One phase of the land program was extended by El Salvador last week, prompting a statement of support from the State Department, but a verdict in the trial is not expected before March, an official said. In explaining the United States ''pledges,'' officials said that when Vice President Bush visited El Salvador on Dec. 11 he met with virtually all the policy makers in the Government and military to discuss how the Salvadorans could win the war against the insurgents and what was needed from the United States to help them to do it. The Salvadorans agreed, a State Department official said, that they would not win the war if the activities of the death squads continued. The squads are right-wing vigilante groups that have assassinated public figures and intimidated others. They have been largely responsible for the El Salvador's poor human rights reputation. The Salvadorans also agreed to extend the land distribution program to keep the support of the unions and poor farmers. Target Dates Set To show that everyone was sincere, Mr. Bush and the Provisional President, Alvaro Magana, agreed on the usefulness of setting target dates for achieving the objectives, a State Department official said. It was agreed that the land distribution program should be extended by the end of the year and that was done. It was also agreed that the death squads should be effectively dismantled by Jan. 10. ''We are quite pleased by the results so far,'' a senior State Department official said. These were among the reasons given by the official for his satisfaction:  - The recent reorganization of the military command not only put ''good military officers where they should be'' but also led to the removal of the heads of the treasury, intelligence and national police, all of whom had been implicated in the death squads.  - The armed forces high command and the commanders of El Salvador's military and public security organizations have all signed a public statement repudiating the death squads and calling on the public to report ''any information that contributes to the identification and capture'' of their members.  - At the instigation of the armed forces, Capt. Eduardo Ernesto Alfonso Avila of the army was arrested in connection with the murder in 1980 of two American land reform specialists and the president of the Salvadoran Institute for Agrarian Reform in a San Salvador hotel coffeeshop. The State Department official said ''he was the guy who masterminded, by most accounts, the murders.''  - The removal of Hector Antonio Regalado as the security chief of the Constituent Assembly. He had been a longtime collaborator of Roberto d'Aubuisson, who headed the Assembly until he resigned recently to run for the presidency as the candidate of the conservative Arena party in elections scheduled for March. According to the State Department official, there were many accusations that Mr. Regalado was involved in death squad activities and ''a lot of it is accurate.''  - The number of people slain by death squads seems to have dropped significantly, from about 25 a week to as few as three recently, an official said. Curbs on Exiles Sought In addition to pledging to seek additional aid, the Administration also told the Salvadorans that it would try to curb Salvadoran exiles living in Miami who are believed to be aiding the death squads. There are believed to have been three principal death squads in El Salvador: the Secret Anti-Communist Army, the General Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez Anti-Communist Brigade the Salvadoran National Command. In his Christmas speech, delivered on Dec. 24, President Magana said, ''There is a lack of respect for the physical integrity of the people - which doesn't come from the Government, but which is its duty to correct.''"
