"The Reagan Administration said today that the war in El Salvador was at an impasse and that human rights abuses remained ''a central problem'' despite some improvements in recent months. The assessment was part of a status report on El Salvador submitted to Congress today by the State Department in place of the twice-a-year certification of human rights progress that was required in recent years. President Reagan withheld approval in November of an extension of the law that made aid to El Salvador contingent on improvements in human rights. State Department officials said today that despite Mr. Reagan's pocket veto of the certification requirement, the Administration would provide Congress with reports roughly every six months on the situation in El Salvador. Rights 'a Central Problem' The 57-page report made public today offered a mixed view of recent military and political developments in El Salvador, concluding that the Salvadoran military continued to suffer from command deficiencies and that recent guerrilla advances, while ''localized,'' demonstrated ''improved coordination and communications, professional military training and extensive logistics systems.'' Predicting a continuing stalemate between Government and guerrilla forces, the report said ''neither the guerrillas nor the armed forces are in any danger of disintegrating.'' The report noted that there has been a steady decline in civilian casualties in El Salvador since 1980, but concluded that ''continued abuse of human rights remains a central problem.'' The report, which blamed both the guerrillas and extreme right-wing political groups for human rights abuses, reported ''a significant increase in death squad activity against prominent individuals, especially academics and labor leaders.'' It attributed the resurgence of ''right-wing violence'' in recent months to political developments in El Salvador, including Government efforts to open a dialogue with the left, labor-organized political strikes and the initial phases of campaigning for presidential elections scheduled for March. The Salvadoran armed forces were also criticized in the report for human rights abuses. The report, however, concluded that ''specific measures have been taken to control the death squads and to exert stricter discipline over members of the armed forces.'' In general, the report found, ''important progress has been made on several fronts related to human rights.'' Citing accounts in the Salvadoran press, the report said, for example, that deaths of noncombatants fell from a total of 177 a month in the first half of 1983 to 104 a month in the last half. Several human rights groups, contesting the Administration's conclusions, said today that Government- sponsored murder and torture continued at high levels in El Salvador. At a news conference, Aryeh Neier, deputy chairman of America's Watch, cited figures compiled by an agency of the Roman Catholic Church that showed 2,615 civilians killed in El Salvador in the last six months by the Salvadoran military and paramilitary groups."
