"Human rights abuses in Guatemala have become ''particularly intractable,'' according to a report issued last week by a New York-based organization. The group, Americas Watch, concluded in a 260-page report that killings and disappearances of civilians in the cities had increased in the five months since Gen.  Oscar Mejia Victores took power in a coup that ousted Gen. Efrain Rios Montt. The report, the result of a seven- month investigation, added that the Reagan Administration ''shares in the responsibility for the gross abuses of human rights'' by failing to publicly denounce them. Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, said the Americas Watch conclusions were ''in error,'' and he accused the human rights group of showing ''partisan political motives'' in its criticism of Reagan Administration policy toward Guatemala. ''Our own information, which we get daily from our embassy, is that the situation has improved in Guatemala in 1983,'' he added. Mr. Abrams said that would be the conclusion of the State Department's annual human rights report, which it will deliver to Congress on Tuesday. End to Aid Is Urged At a news conference Tuesday in Manhattan, officials of Americas Watch called on governments and international relief organizations to end all economic assistance to Guatemala, including aid for basic human needs, unless those providing aid are also permitted to distribute it. ''The Guatemalan Government unquestionably is using international assistance for purposes of propping up its counterinsurgency forces,'' said Robert Kogod Goldman, part of a delegation that visited Guatemala in November. Mr. Goldman is associate dean and professor at American University Law School in Washington. United States military aid to Guatemala was ended in 1977 after human rights abuses were criticized by the Carter Administration. Congress voted to cut off economic aid last year. The report also said Guatamala was being transformed into ''a nation of prisoners.'' It said that tens of thousands of Guatemalans had been forced to live in ''re-education camps'' and that 700,000 civilians had been forced to join civil patrols and perform services for the army. It also said there were daily news reports of people disappearing, and of some being tortured in prisons. The report acknowledged that killings in rural areas had decreased and that the Mejia Victores Government had disbanded the special jurisdiction courts, which Americas Watch said were responsible for violations of due process, arbitrary sentences and torture. But it also documented thousands of urban killings in the last five months and noted a connection between the dissolution of the courts and the re-emergence of ''death squads.'' Orville H. Schell, chairman of Americas Watch, said the delegation raised the issue of rights abuses during a meeting with General Mejia Victores. The general reportedly denied that any disappearances had occurred, and he insisted that Government security forces played no role in kidnappings or killings. The general has refused to allow a human rights monitoring group to set up offices in Guatemala."
