"United States diplomats, local government officials and human rights activists here say the number of people who have disappeared after being abducted in El Salvador has dropped in recent weeks. But there is disagreement over the significance of the development given the continuing problem with this and other forms of political terrorism. There is also uncertainty about whether critical statements by the Reagan Administration and the Salvadorans about the country's human rights situation are responsible for the recent change. ''It's really early to say whether what we've been doing lately has had any impact,'' an official at the American Embassy said. ''There's more of a consciousness that the thing should be stopped, but the big quandary is how to put the genie back in the bottle. It's just out of control.'' Violence Remains Widespread In El Salvador, top military leaders have publicly condemned rightist terror, and the army has issued regulations forbidding torture, clandestine prisons and the practice of making arrests while dressed in civilian clothes. Col. Carlos Reynaldo Lopez Nuila, director of the National Police, said the Government wanted death squads to ''disappear forever,'' and he announced that an official investigation of the squads was being planned. But the political violence remains widespread, with the kidnapping of civilians by armed gangs still common if somewhat less frequent. According to the office of Archbishop Arturo Rivera y Damas, there were 21 disappearances in December, as against 48 in September. At La Esperanza prison in San Salvador, inmates said that bloodied men were still brought in regularly and that many of them told of having been abused by soldiers or the police. American diplomats said that when Secretary of State George P. Shultz visits here next week, he will restate Washington's desire to curb the political violence that has killed more than 40,000 Salvadorans in the last five years. Since late November, the White House and the State Department have issued several strongly worded statements condemning human rights violations in El Salvador. The persistence of political violence here has hindered the Reagan Administration's efforts to win Congressional and public support for its policies in Central America. The Administration is expected to seek substantial increases in military and economic aid to El Salvador this year. Human rights activists say they remain convinced that much political violence is carried out by soldiers and police officers. They express doubt that the United States, given its security relationship with the Salvadoran military, can take the necessary steps to curb abuses. 'The Terrible Problem' ''President Reagan has spoken a lot about death squads lately, but there is also the terrible problem of many civilians in conflictive areas being killed by military forces,'' said a leading spokesman for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese. ''To clean things up would require a total change in the military structure, which is something that neither the Government or even the Americans are ready to do.'' Supporters of the Government, including American officials, said there had been signs of modest improvements. They noted that two Salvadoran officers implicated in death squad activity had been transferred abroad and that a third was under investigation. They also cited the recent order distributed to all soldiers that forbids clandestine jails, torture of prisoners and the practice of making arrests while in civilian clothes. 'The Numbers Always Go Down' According to Adan Rosales, an inmate at La Ezperanza and a leader of the Committee of Political Prisoners in El Salvador, ''the numbers always go down for a short period when Washington needs to show some improvements here in order to increase the aid.'' ''The true test is what happens after the aid is approved,'' Mr. Rosales said. Jose Santos Amaya Silva, 22 years old, who said he was an impoverished farm laborer from the contested town of Jucuapa, was brought to La Esperanza on Jan. 20. In an interview there, he said five armed men in civilian clothes had stopped him as he was walking down a street in Jucuapa a week earlier. He said they accused him of being a guerrilla and forced him to accompany them to the army base at San Miguel, 20 miles away, where he said he was beaten and tortured with electric shocks for six days by men he said were wearing army uniforms. Mr. Amaya Silva said he was then sent to the local National Guard outpost, where his thumbs were broken.  He was driven the 85 miles to La Esperanza, and when he was interviewed last Sunday, his thumbs appeared disfigured and bloody. His head and body were severely bruised. Colonel Lopez Nuila denied that political violence was linked to the military. He confirmed reports that Vice President Bush, who visited here last month, had presented the Salvadoran authorities with a list of suspected death squad leaders and had suggested that they be sent out of the country. He said that although Mr. Bush had not provided any evidence to support his allegations, the Government had nonetheless told several civilians whose names were on the list ''that to help the political process in El Salvador, the best would be for them to leave the country.'' Squads Only 'Complicate Things' ''I believe the death squads do not add anything positive to the process of defending the country,'' said Colonel Lopez Nuila, who is a member of the Government's human rights commission. ''All they do is complicate things.'' One of the two officers reportedly being transferred out of the country, Lieut. Col. Aristides Alfonso Marquez, was a close aide of Colonel Lopez Nuila and had been serving as chief of intelligence for the National Police. The other officer, Maj. Jose Ricardo Pozo, former head of intelligence for the Treasury Police, has been sent to a diplomatic post in Paraguay, the Salvadoran Provisional President, Alvaro Magana, said in an interview. Recently released figures on political killings in 1983 illustrate the disparity between official American reporting, which is based principally on newspaper accounts, and that of private Salvadoran organizations that take testimony directly from relatives of victims. The United States calculated the number of civilian deaths last year at 1,677, while the Archbishop's office put it at 5,142. The Archbishop's statistics are compiled by a section of his office. One active death squad, the Salvadoran Anti-Communist Command, issued two communiques this month condemning the United States for urging changes in El Salvador. It said new rules governing the arrest process and the treatment of prisoners were ''contrary to all known doctrines of counterinsurgency'' and demanded that ties with the United States be reduced ''in defense of our national sovereignty.'' Rightist leaders, including the presidential candidate Roberto d'Aubuisson, who himself has been linked to the death-squad activity, have said that Marxist guerrillas brought on the spiral of political violence. ''When we react as human beings, which we are, then they say we infringe on human rights,'' Mr. d'Aubuisson declared in a speech Sunday."
