"Should military aid to El Salvador be tied to human rights improvements there? To this question, raised anew by report of the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America, the Reagan Administration has a clear answer: It should. The issue is, precisely how? Administration support for democratic reforms in El Salvador, including land reform and free elections, was clear long before January 1982 - the first time that the President was required by Congress to certify human rights progress in El Salvador before providing military aid. As early as March 1981, just six weeks after coming to office, President Reagan denounced ''terrorism of the right or left in El Salvador.'' More recently, this past fall, the Administration further emphasized its support for democratic officials and trade union leaders. The President sent several officials - Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Fred C. Ikle (a visit in which I participated) and Vice President Bush - to visit El Salvador, and all of them emphasized the need for improved human rights performance. There were also major speeches on the issue by Mr. Ikle, Ambassador Thomas R. Pickering and Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth W.  Dam.  The message has been very clear and has been getting through. The press has recorded a series of actions by the Salvadoran Government against individuals thought to be involved in death squad activities and other human rights violations. Moreover, the number of press-reported civilian deaths attributed to political violence have gone down, from more than 400 a month in 1981, to roughly half that number in 1982 and about one-third of it in 1983. In this same period, the land reform program has continued. El Salvador's first free election was held in March 1982, and another is scheduled for this March. The issue at stake, then, is not whether the United States should be putting heavy pressure on El Salvador to improve its human rights performance. Instead, the issue is whether the only way to do this is through an all-or-nothing certification process such as President Regan vetoed in November.  For nearly two years, we have made clear our doubts about that approach. For one thing, it provided an incentive for the violent right and left to step up their activities at certification time in an effort to force the United States to end its support for the democratic center. For another, that approach failed to ask a number of key questions about El Salvador: Did the people support the Government? Would an aid cutoff improve the human rights situation? Would an aid cutoff risk a victory by Marxist- Leninst guerrillas - and what would the effects of that be on human rights? Surely, the cause of human rights does not require facilitating Communist advances.  In his message vetoing the certification requirement, the President promised that although he was no longer required to report to Congress about human rights in El Salvador, he would nevertheless have the State Department submit periodic public reports. The first was delivered to Congress on Jan. 16 - amply demonstrating that we share the view expressed by many in Congress and the bipartisan commission that continuing and increasing United States aid must be linked to the human rights situation in El Salvador.  The commission's report does not attempt to suggest new legislative language, and clearly this will be a matter of careful discussion between the Administration and Congress. Our goal must be to write a statute that, as the commission suggests, ties military aid to human rights progress, yet avoids artificial deadlines and all-or-nothing choices and considers the overall human rights effects of giving or withholding various levels of aid. As the President recently indicated, our task will be to work with the Congress to find a way to resolve this issue - just as the bipartisan commission resolved many issues in the course of its deliberations.  The Administration will continue its strong support for the development of democracy in El Salvador. Democratic politicians and labor and peasant leaders know full well that the United States Government is providing invaluable support to them. By the same token, extremists of the violent left and right know that this Administration's human rights policies have been crucial in keeping them from reversing El Salvador's democratic gains. Our support for democracy in El Salvador is a policy of which all Americans should be proud and which we will continue. In the last analysis, our interests and those of the Salvadoran people are exactly congruent, for we all seek a peaceful and democratic El Salvador."
