"On a clear day, a person looking across the broad River Plate from Buenos Aires can see the faint outlines of this small, troubled country, which has long been in Argentina's shadow. When eight years of military rule came to an end last month in Argentina and Raul Alfonsin became the elected President, there was a noticeable stirring here. Last week, labor unions closed down Montevideo during a 24-hour general strike, the first in a decade of military government. But the example of Argentine democracy has been a double-edged sword. Prosecutions of former Argentine military leaders for human rights abuses have shaken Uruguay's generals, putting in doubt their promise to hold elections in November and relinquish power next year. ''The Argentines have done us such horrible damage,'' lamented Julio M. Sanguinetti, president of the Colorados, one of this country's two largest parties. The tremors in Uruguay are the most prominent example, but reverberations from Argentina are also being felt throughout Latin America. In neighboring Chile, the 10-year-old Government of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, hoping to discourage comparisons, has been quietly rejecting visa applications from Argentine generals. Chileans say that, contrary to the Argentine pattern, abuses such as torture, murder and disappearances are the province of the secret police, which has only a handful of military commanders. Chile's military has remained largely out of politics and respected, despite the opposition to General Pinochet. Last week, the Government-owned television was told to reduce its Argentine human rights coverage, journalists said. In Paraguay, Latin America's senior strongman, Gen. Alfredo Stroessner, has decided to allow the return from Argentina of some Paraguayan exiles, notably dissident former officials and congressmen who are considered unlikely to challenge him. In Brazil, the Argentine election has spurred demands to speed up the transition to full democracy after 20 years of military rule. A Congress was elected last year and presidential elections are scheduled in 1985 under an electoral college formula likely to favor the military's candidate. Last week, nearly 30,000 people attended the first rally in Brazil in favor of direct presidential elections. They applauded an Argentine from Mr. Alfonsin's Radical Party. Hospitality for Exiles Diplomats said a further effect of the Argentine events, although difficult to prove, may have been to discourage restless military officers considering coups against the young, economically troubled democracies in Bolivia and Peru. Argentina's military was heavily involved in past Bolivian coups and in training Peruvian officers. Also last week, Mr. Alfonsin reportedly notified Washington that Argentina would no longer support the rebels fighting in Nicaragua. He has offered to make Buenos Aires a center for South American exiles. Foreign Ministry officials said they would be issuing strong condemnations of human rights abuses everywhere. But they promised not to interfere in other countries' affairs. In Uruguay, however, Argentine influence is so great that even a whisper carries weight. Argentine television shows dominate the air waves. Argentines are pervasive in literature and the arts. They take over the beaches each summer. Smuggled dollar deposits from Argentina underwrite the financial system. And Uruguay's political future is likely to center on the competing ambitions of President Gregorio Alvarez, a retired general who wants to stay in power, and Wilson Ferreira Aldunate, the exiled head of the important National Party, who is moving to Buenos Aires from London at the invitation of the Alfonsin Government. Mr. Ferreira Aldunate, who was defeated for president in 1971, is the last of the National and Colorado Party leaders still banned from politics. Ten years of exile have given him a mythical aura, making him a potential front- runner. He was originally a conservative rancher but his contacts with leftists and his needling from abroad have upset the military. The Nationals say they will boycott elections if he cannot participate. The Colorados say they would join in a boycott; they want Mr. Ferreira Aldunate to return so they can run against a man instead of a myth. General Alvarez was appointed in 1981 to oversee the transition. In October, the junta of 26 generals and admirals rejected his proposal to postpone the elections because of growing unrest. Now he cites the Argentine prosecutions as an argument for delay. If the schedule holds, he hopes to run or to sponsor a Government candidate in truncated elections without Mr. Ferreira Aldunate and thus possibly without the main parties, which would be to his advantage. General Alvarez lacks popular support, although his position was strengthened last week when an ally, Gen. Pedro Aranco, was named army commander. General Alvarez hopes the protests will foster a backlash demanding order, senior officials said. He is also banking on the newly appointed Economics Minister, Alejandro Vegh Villegas, a respected former Ambassador to Washington, to rescue the economy. However, the independent Mr. Vegh Villegas is known to be disenchanted with General Alvarez's hardening position and to be considering resigning - which the junta fears would be a further blow to its remaining support."
