"To the Editor: Nina H. Shea of the International League for Human Rights comments (letter, Dec. 3) on your Nov. 22 news story that Nicaragua is censoring publications of the independent Permanent Commission on Human Rights and human-rights reporting by Catholic Radio in that country. Her letter is basically correct, but clarification and context are needed. The Government claims that the Permanent Commission on Human Rights, which has a history of circulating false or exaggerated reports, is less a ''human rights watchdog'' than a propaganda organ of the ''contras,'' the U.S.-sponsored armed opposition. It has never denounced a single human-rights abuse by the ''contras.'' Neither has Catholic Radio.  I concur that restricting the activities of the commission and Catholic Radio adversely affects the human-rights climate in Nicaragua. I am also aware, as Miss Shea is, that foreign human-rights groups are completely free to operate in that country. The New York-based Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights stated in its April 1985 report: ''The Nicaraguan Government has held itself open to visits by international human-rights organizations. It has repeatedly opened its practices to scrutiny by such bodies and has gone to considerable lengths to facilitate their investigation despite its awareness that critical reports are the likely outcome of these inquiries.'' Since Miss Shea gratuitously points to the role of the commission in ''monitoring torture,'' I must point out that all reputable international investigatory bodies - including the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights of the Organization of American States - have concluded that torture has been neither the policy nor practice of the Nicaraguan Government since the overthrow of Somoza. She refers to the case of Jose Soza Jarquin. Mr. Soza, a driver for the permanent commission, was recruited by a ''contra'' cell operating in Managua precisely because the commission provided good cover. When the cell was broken up, his name was found on its membership list. After Miss Shea's organization and two members of the U.S. Congress intervened, the Government freed him as an act of conciliation and good will. Finally, to criticize human-rights limitations in Nicaragua without mentioning the Reagan Administration's policy of aggression against that country is to abandon reality. This strategy has been characterized by massive and continuing violations of human rights and the laws of war. Beside this flagrant fact, Miss Shea's complaints are quibbles. DAVID C. MACMICHAEL Senior Fellow Council on Hemispheric Affairs Washington, Dec. 4, 1985"
