"The conviction last week of five Argentine military commanders for waging a ''dirty war'' against their own people is obviously an encouraging precedent for democracy in Latin America. But democrats elsewhere in the hemisphere, especially in Central America, who have endured similar reigns of terror still find hopes of human rights trials elusive. Not the least of their burdens is the legacy of Reagan Administration policy. The Argentine death squads bequeathed their modus operandi to the death squads of Central America. The wave of state violence that began in Argentina in 1976 - and killed at last 9,000 people before it ran its course - struck El Salvador and Guatemala in 1979 and after. The cars without license plates, the kidnappings, the assassination of church leaders, the torture and the disappearances - all were methods tried first in Argentina and later borrowed by the Central Americans. The arraignment of high-ranking military officers who oversaw this Central American terrorism would go a long way toward establishing democracy in the region. From the start, there has been plentiful evidence that the violence in Central America - as in Argentina - has been largely directed from the highest levels of government. The problem is that many of the prime suspects have enjoyed the blessings of the Reagan Administration. In February 1981, Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. called for resumption of United States aid to Argentina on the grounds that it had made ''dramatic, dramatic improvements'' in human rights. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the United States' chief delegate to the United Nations, held friendly meetings with a host of Argentine officers. Gen. Roberto Eduardo Viola, who was one of the five sentenced to prison last week, was warmly welcomed at the White House in March 1981. General Viola's counterparts in Central America received similar aprobation in the first half of President Reagan's term. In 1982, Administration officials described Roberto D'Aubuisson, the right-wing leader said to have close ties to the Salvadoran death squads, as a ''fine young democrat'' who could not even be called Jefferson Morley is associate editor of The New Republic. ''an extremist.'' The Administration allowed Argentine Army advisers to train anti-Sandinista insurgents in kidnapping, assassination and torture. In December 1982, President Reagan himself downplayed the death squad rampages in Guatemala. None of this softness on terrorism has been lost on the democrats in Central America - and it surely gives them pause. After all, if President Reagan regarded mere criticism of the Guatemalan generals as a 'bum rap'' three years ago, how could he possibly believe that a formal indictment of those same generals would be justified today? In some cases, the attitude in Washington may even endanger Central American moderates. A Central American who publicly calls for prosecution of military officers involved in death squads knows in any case that he may be their next victim. On top of this, indifference, if not hostility, from the United States makes it all the more prudent to keep silent. The Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, Elliott Abrams, has told foreign reporters that the Administration will support Central Americans whether they ''decide to have a 100 percent amnesty'' for officers involved in rights abuses or ''decide to try everyone.'' The trouble - as Mr. Abrams himself has admitted on other occasions - is that Central American leaders have not been able even to discipline their military subordinates, much less put them on trial. A Congressional resolution, supported by the Administration, could clarify the United States' position. Such a resolution would hail Argentina for its impartial and unflinching approach to its own trial. The resolution should also state that any Latin American government that followed the Argentine example would enjoy the support of the people of United States and, if desired, the assistance of their Government. This would underline the United States' position that democracy consists not just of elections but of the rule of law."
