"The Senate added two useful riders when it approved the Administration's $6.7 billion foreign aid package. As requested by President Reagan, it removed long-standing restrictions on aid to Chile and Pakistan. But without asking, the President also got what he needs: an amber warning that Congress will not forget Chile's human rights abuses or Pakistan's nuclear ambitions. That is a minimal signal for an amnesia-prone Administration. In lifting the 1976 ban on aid to Chile, the Senate yielded twothirds of a loaf. Chile's champions argue that its military regime has settled for a milder repression and, in any case, is sturdily anti-Communist. They concede but discount the Santiago regime's involvement in the 1976 murder of the exiled Orlando Letelier on a Washington street. Unfortunately, Chile has repaid Mr. Reagan's indulgence with a new crackdown on democratic opponents, and by closing its courts to further appeals in the Letelier scandal. The least the Senate could honorably do was to require the President to certify as the aid is dispensed that Chile is making significant progress on human rights and is no longer promoting terrorism abroad. In so voting, the Senate also obtained an assurance from Chairman Percy that the Foreign Relations Committee would insist on hearings to examine such assurances. Such certification is not an empty formula, as the case of Pakistan proves. Under present law, it cannot qualify for aid unless the President gives formal assurance that it is not developing nuclear weapons. For all his eagerness to help Pakistan, Mr. Reagan refuses to go that far and asked that the requirement be dropped. But Senator Glenn's compromise is the better solution: Any nonnuclear country automatically forfeits American aid if it explodes a nuclear device. These riders merit approval by the House. The Senate has gone about as far as it should to give the Administration a freer hand without misleading foreign nations about the true American consensus on fundamental questions."
