"A captured Salvadoran national guardsman said in a broadcast over a guerrilla-run radio station that the four American missionaries killed last year were slain by guardsmen who suspected that two of them were running messages between leftists in Nicaragua and El Salvador. The claim came yesterday as a critic of the Salvadoran junta's human rights policies, Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, ended a three-day visit and left El Salvador without making any public statements. Senator Dodd, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, proposed an amendment to the $114 million aid package for El Salvador requiring President Reagan to certify twice a year that El Salvador is making progress in human rights, economic development and political liberalization. The proposal was made in part because of reported human rights abuses by Government forces against the civilian population. Church sources here estimate that most of the 24,000 people killed in El Salvador since Jan. 1, 1980 have died in execution-style slayings rather than in combat between the leftist guerrillas and Government troops. U.S. Missionaries Among Victims Among the victims were three United States nuns and a lay religious worker slain in December 1980, purportedly by six guardsmen now under arrest. The women had been en route from the international airport to San Salvador. The three nuns, Ita Ford and Maura Clarke, members of the Maryknoll Order, and Dorothy Kazel, of the Ursuline Order, and Jean Donovan, a lay missionary, were killed because the first two had just arrived from Nicaragua, the captured guardsman said in an interview broadcast by the rebel station Radio Venceremos. The guardsman, identified as Isidoro Guevara, 25 years old, said that he had taken part in a guard meeting last summer in which a major informed his troops that six guardsmen had been arrested for the Americans' slaying. According to the guardsman, the major had told the troops that the suspects knew the women had arrived from Nicaragua and could have been carrying messages between leftists in Nicaragua and El Salvador. The Salvadoran junta has repeatedly accused Nicaragua's leftist Sandinista rulers of smuggling weapons to the guerrillas in El Salvador. The six guard suspects were jailed in April but have yet to be brought to trial."
