"The document is entitled ''U.S. Commitment to Human Rights'' and it was published by the State Department on July 14. It declares: ''Ours is not a policy of 'selective indignation.' Rather, it is one of balanced and evenhanded condemnation of human rights violations wherever they occur.'' Now consider the case of Chile.  A country with a long and strong democratic tradition, Chile since 1973 has been ruled by avowedly authoritarian generals. During that time about 1,500 Chileans have ''disappeared'' and perhaps twice as many have been forced into exile. According to Amnesty International, prison torture is commonplace. And Chile has yet to answer for its complicity in the murder in 1976 of an exiled diplomat, Orlando Letelier, on a str eet in the capital of the United States. These affronts trig gered a suspension of all American aid. From the start, however, the Reagan Administration has preferred to stress the affirmative: Chile's anti-Communism, its seeming stability and improving market economy. Also, Secretary of State Haig reported in July that there had been ''dramatic, dramatic reductions'' in human rights violations, and requalified Chile for Export-Import Bank loans. Plans were drawn for joint naval maneuvers. And a month later Jeane Kirkpatrick, America's U.N. representative, was in Santiago pledging to ''fully normalize'' U.S. ties with Chile. What followed is revealing. Within 48 hours of Mrs. Kirkpatrick's departure, plainclothes agents stormed into the home of Jaime Castillo, a 67-year-old Christian Democrat and former Minister of Justice. He was beaten, dragged into a car and, along with three other opposition leaders, dumped on the Argentine frontier. Mr. Castillo had led Chile's Human Rights Commission; he also represented the Letelier family in a legal appeal for redress. With him removed, a military court last week rejected that appeal. Chile's peremptory expulsions are heartless as well as lawless. Mr. Castillo had hoped to discuss them and other matters with Mrs.  Kirkpatrick. But she had no time for him in Santiago; he was allowed to speak instead with the wife of one of her aides, at a hotel. He stands these days for the radical idea that as a condition for enjoying normal relations with the United States, Chile should be asked to set definite durations for banishment and provide for judicial challenges to permanent expulsions. He finally caught up with Mrs. Kirkpatrick in New York. The visit was timely, for Congress is now weighing repeal of a 1976 prohibition on aid to Chile. It would seem an opportune moment for the Administration to demonstrate that its ''evenhanded'' human rights position means what it plainly says. Chile has presumed heavily on America's generosity. Anything less than a well-aimed rebuke would demean all language and translate evenhanded into empty-minded."
