"A dense haze filled a one-room back-street apartment here as three men, chain-smoking cigarettes, held a clandestine meeting. Identifying themselves as the three top labor leaders in Bolivia, they said they lived on the run. ''Experience has shown us,'' Victor Lima, one of the men, said of Bolivia's military rulers, ''that they will not treat us benignly.'' The country's labor unions, gathered under the umbrella of the Bolivian Workers Federation, have historically been the most powerful force outside the armed forces, and one of the military's first acts when it took power in a coup 13 months ago was to ban all union activity and proclaim the federation abolished. Security agents invaded the federation's headquarters, arrested many labor leaders and politicians inside, reportedly killed at least three of them and demolished the building, creating what still today is an empty lot. Mr. Lima, a textile union leader and secretary of the federation, told of spending five months in jail, including three months in a jungle camp where he said he was tortured with electric prods and in other brutal ways. Banished from Bolivia, he slipped back in to keep the federation alive and active with the two ot her men at the meeting, Gonz alo Guzman and Aldo Flores. Other members of the federation's executive board are said to be in exile in Peru and elsewhere. Bolivia's labor movement, initially led by the country's militant tin miners, dates from the 1920's and is one of the most developed in Latin America. Union Activity Largely Repressed The three leaders spoke of class struggle, but their immediate interest, they said, was in higher wages, improved working conditions, human rights and elections. The military rulers have succeeded in largely repressing union activity.  Three months ago, Genaro Flores, the leading campesino organizer, was shot and paralyzed while trying to escape after being captured.  Strong protests by Western and Latin American embassies and international human rights groups won him freedom to leave for the United States, then France."
