"The 15-minute cartoon showed a cynical bear and a vulture plotting to take over a tiny, far-off country.  The bear was never identified, but its headquarters looked distinctly like the Kremlin. The cartoon was shown on television here many times last week and there was little doubt about its message: Rebellious military units were in the employ of the Soviet Union. Few Bolivians seemed to believe the charge; what struck them more was the sophistication of the cartoon. The announcer's accent marked it as one more example of the deep involvement here of Argentina, their increasingly despised neighbor. ''If ever a civilian government comes back to power,'' a former Cabinet minister said, ''the Argentines better run for the border.'' Coup Backed by Argentina Argentina backed the coup led by Gen. Luis Garcia Meza in July 1980 with more than money, arms and planning. According to Bolivian documents made public last year, they sent electric prods for torturing prisoners and advisers to show how to use them. When General Garcia Meza was forced to resign by the military insurgents last week, Argentina threw its support behind the junta appointed by him as an extension of his Government, according to Argentine dipomats here. Gen. Leopoldo F. Galtieri, the Argentine Army commander, stopped at the airport here last Tuesday night on the way to Washington, where he is just ending an official visit. General Garcia Meza, who had just announced his resignation, and the three service chiefs who make up the junta met with him on his plane. Since then, diplomats here say, General Galtieri has reportedly been seeking United States support for the junta in Washington. There has been no American ambassador here since Marvin Weissman was withdrawn by the Carter Administration after last year's coup, in which 300 people were killed. The Reagan Administration had been considering normalizing relations, but its attitude has since cooled, not because of human rights violations but because of the supposed complicity of high members of the Bolivian Government in drug trafficking to the United States. General Back From Exile The widespread impression among Bolivian officials and diplomats is that the United States favors the rebels, viewing them as a reformist element within the military. Gen. Humberto Cayoja, a former army commander, and Gen. Lucio Anez Rivero, a leader of the latest insurrection, said in recent interviews that a White House official visited them secretly while they were in exile in Buenos Aires two months ago. They declined to name the official. General Cayoja, who is widely respected within the military, returned from exile last night. How he and the junta will come to terms will be a major factor in the future direction of the Government. General Anez charged today that the junta was violating the compromise agreement reached Friday under which the junta would remain in power for the time being and the many officers exiled in the last year would be allowed back in the country. Brazil, Bolivia's other powerful neighbor, is also on the side of the rebels, allowing many of those in exile to re-enter Bolivia secretly across its border. Such support, however, is minor compared with that given the Garcia Meza regime by the Argentines, who reportedly have some 70 military advisers here."
