"The Reagan Administration has ordered American delegates to international development banks to support loans to Chile, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay. The order, which reverses the Carter Administration's policy of not voting for such loans on human rights grounds, was based on a State Department determination that ''there have been significant improvements in the human rights situation in those countries,'' according to a department spokesman. The decision has drawn criticism on Capitol Hill from human rights activists, including Representative Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa. Congress Was Told on July 1 ''That is simply not true,'' asserted Mr. Harkin, the primary author of a 1977 law that instructs the Government to oppose loans by international banks to countries that engage in ''a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights.'' He said, ''This decision quite clearly violates the spirit and letter of the law.'' Negative votes by the United States did not block development bank loans. A State Department offical today described them as symbolic.  Congress was informed of the Reagan Administration's action in a private letter dated July 1 from W. Dennis Thomas, Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Legislative Affairs, to Representative Jerry M. Patterson, chairman of a banking subcommittee that oversees the international development banks. ''The Department of State has reviewed the current human rights situation in Argentina, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay,'' it said, ''and has determined that the human rights legislation enacted in 1977 does not require U.S. opposition to loans to these countries.'' Since 1977, the United States has opposed all loans to Chile and has abstained on international loan proposals for Uruguay, Paraguay and Argentina. The State Department said the Carter Administration voted no or abstained on 122 loans to 16 countries. Judith Jamison, public affairs adviser to the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights, noted, however, that ''the previous Administration never formally designated any countries as falling within the definition'' of the 1977 law. According to the Treasury Department letter, delegates to the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Finance Corporation and the Inter-American Development Bank have been instructed to support $483.8 million in loans to the four countries this month. The Inter-American Development Bank today approved a $126 million loan to finance highway construction in Chile. In denouncing the decision, Mr. Harkin said that the human rights records of all four countries had repeatedly been criticized. In May, Amnesty International, a London-based group that monitors human rights violations, issued a statement concluding that there had been a ''marked deterioration'' in the human rights situation in Chile last year. Mr. Harkin said that this year there had been a ''wave of new arrests in Chile, more than 200,'' and that Chile had refused to prosecute people indicted by an American court in connection with the assassinations of Orlando Letelier in 1976 in Washington. Dispute on Chile The State Department spokesman replied that ''there have been no disappearances in Chile since 1977'' and ''almost all political prisoners had been released by early 1978.'' The official statement said that although the Administration regretted Chile's failure to prosecute in the Letelier case, ''We believe our voting policy should reflect the actual human rights situation in the country.'' Mr. Harkin said that Argentina had not explained the disappearance of 10,000 to 15,000 people and that it continued to hold about 1,000 people, 900 of them under decrees that require neither formal charges nor a fixed term of imprisonment. Torture continues, Mr.  Harkin charged. The State Department asserted that ''the level of violence in Argentina to which terrorist activity was a major contributing factor peaked in the years 1976-78.'' The statement added that there were ''44 credibly documented disappearances'' in 1979, 12 last year and ''no confirmed disappearances since last August.'' While the number of prisoners being held under special decrees is about 900, the statement says, this is a decline from 8,000 and ''releases continue.'' The Reagan Administration has asked Congress to lift an embargo on military aid, sales and training to Argentina that was imposed two years ago because of its human rights policies, and several generals and admirals have visited Argentina recently. Paraguay and Uruguay On Paraguay, the State Department spokesman said that the number of people being detained had declined in recent years from 600 to fewer than a dozen, and that the remaining prisoners were the subject of ''diplomatic discussions.'' On Uruguay, Mr. Harkin and others have charged that the country has more political prisoners per capita than any other Latin American nation. The State Department spokesman replied, ''We don't want to get into a debate about what constitutes a political prisoner.'' The statement added, however, that about 1,100 people in Uruguay claim that status. Nevertheless, ''there have been very few new arrests and convictions in recent years,'' the statement continued. In a general defense of the new policy, the State Department said, ''We believe that more will be gained for human rights by recognizing improvement than by the continued public condemnation implicit in negative votes or abstentions on international loans.'' Another State Department official said that the negative American votes and abstentions had been symbolic because they had not prevented the four countries from receiving international development bank aid."
