"Lieut. Gen. Luis V. Queirolo, head of the ruling junta, says that the military Government will be slow in returning Uruguay to democracy despite the overwh elming rejection of a proposed constitution in a plebiscite Sunda y. In an interview yesterday, General Queirolo added that the United States, which has had poor relations with Uruguay because of alleged human rights violations here, has ''nothing to do'' with how the Government will proceed. Fingering a sheath of papers on a simple desk in a small, neat office, the general, who is Commander in Chief of the army, maintained that it was the proposed constitution, not the armed forces, that had been rejected. ''No one is going to teach Uruguay what democracy is, absolutely nobody,'' said the general, a short, fit 55-year-old man with thick gray hair. ''We were raised democratically. Our parents were democrats. Our children are democrats. Our wives are democrats. We firmly believe in democracy.'' Not a Time for 'Brusque Change' But, he sai d, after seven years of military rule Uruguay is still not ready for a return to democracy. ''All emergency periods, like the ones we h ave suffered to date, cannot suffer a brusque change,'' he said. ''Th e transition from this process to the next of complete normalization should be slow.'' The constitution, which would have given the military final authority on all policies, was defeated by a margin of 58 percent to 42 percent. Afterward the State Department issued a statement in Washington calling for a consensus that would ''lead to an early agreement on the most appropriate course to return Uruguay to a full democracy.'' The tone of the statement reflected the abandonment of the more strident human rights stance the Carter Administration maintained until last year, when it said the use of torture by the Government had effectively stopped. Relations remain stiff because of a Government ban on political activity. No Change in Relations Expected General Queirolo, who was heartened by the election of Ronald Reagan because Mr. Reagan is seen here as less concerned about human rights, insisted that the plebiscite was strictly an internal matter. He said he did not expect relations with the United States to deteriorate because of the vote. Citing the honesty of the plebiscite, he said: ''We have demonstrated our democratic convictions and given an example to the Western world of an election made under absolute conditions of peace and security.'' Opposition leaders, however, said the vote meant that the majority wanted a return to civilian rule. The leaders of the two traditional parties, the Colorados and the Blancos, have been meeting jointly this week to draw up demands. The minimum demand, many opposition leaders say, is the ending of the prohibition on political activity, acceptance of free expression and assembly, the end of press censorship and the lifting of restrictions that prevent 230 former leaders from even attending political meetings. New Face Emerges in Campaign ''This does not mean that they have to go back to the barracks immediately,'' said Alberto Brause Berreta, a 42-year-old Harvardeducated attorney who is one of the new leaders to emerge from the plebiscite campaign.  ''But liberty should be restored to the traditional parties, and then a constituent assembly chosen through them to draw up a new constitution.'' General Queirolo said the junta would be considering whether to speak with the parties. He also said that controversial sections of the constitution would be reconsidered, especially the requirement that only military-approved candidates could run for president in elections proposed for next year. A provision creating a political control tribunal that could impeach any official will also be reconsidered. The general said that the principle of a national security council dominated by the military as the final authority in government would remain, though its form might change. Discerns Mandate Against Change He said that many of those who voted against the constitution were voting against a change in military control. Others, he said, have a ''thin memory'' of the terrorism that once plagued the country. ''The armed forces could have acted at its own discretion,'' the general said. ''But they are not struggling for gratefulness, nor are they struggling for demagogic goals. They are fulfilling a mission, and I am very proud because they are fulfilling it with great honesty.'' ''The significance of this plebiscite is that it was submitted to popular will,'' he said. ''The peo ple refused it.''"
