"The human rights situation in El Salvador ''continues to be bad but it's better than it was,'' the new United States Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton, asserted diplomatically last week in his first interview since assuming the post in May. Not even supporters of the Reagan Administration's policy of aid to embattled non-Communist, Central American regimes would say the same of Guatemala. Soldiers thinly disguised as members of the Secret Anti-Communist Army continue to assassinate moderate and leftist politicians. Victims in the past 10 months have included 76 leaders of the Guatemalan Christian Democratic Party, which is allied with that of El Salvador's President, Jose Napoleon Duarte. Despite the murders, the Administration has issued an export license to sell $3.1 million worth of jeeps and trucks to the Guatemalan Army, it was disclosed last week. In order to do so, it reclassfied military vehicles as no longer on a list of items Congress has banned for export to countries ''engaged in consistent patterns of gross violations'' of human rights. Guatemala stopped buying United States arms in 1977 in anger at Carter Administration and Congressional criticism of its domestic affairs. The Reagan Administration hopes that by re-establishing ties, it will gain some leverage over Guatemalan policies while at the same time helping the regime to suppress a leftist rebellion. Counteracting what the Administration contends is Cuban-abetted subversion is also an underlying rationale for a planned program of economic assistance to Caribbean and Central American nations. But one of the likely recipients, Prime Minister Edward P.G. Seaga of Jamaica, said in Washington last week that he could not say ''at this time'' that Cuba was fomenting ''active subversion'' in the Caribbean. Mr. Seaga, a Harvard Business School Graduate and the first foreign head of state to be received by President Reagan, was in Washington to address the Organization of American States. He said the aim of the regional assistance plan should be to double per capita income in 15 years."
