"American critics of Jacobo Timerman, as well as Jews in Argentina, have accused him of exaggerating the degree of official anti-Semitism in that country, where he was imprisoned and tortured after his newspaper was seized by the Government. The denials of Jews in Argentina are questionable. Only the boldest of them would be likely to denounce a Government known to be violently repressive; and persecuted minorities have often sought, as in Germany in the 1930's, to deny their persecution in order to appease their persecutors. Nevertheless, I asked Mr. Timerman at breakfast today if the charge was true. Had he exaggerated Argentina's anti-Semitism?  ''I don't think so,'' he said. ''But maybe I did. What difference would it make? What does it matter if one Jew is being tortured rather than 10? Would that change the point?'' The point, he insisted, was not anti-Semitism - although he did not back away from his charges that it is ugly and rampant in Argentina, and that the right-wing military Government there espouses and encourages it. But Jacobo Timerman's real point is that his is part of a worldwide, probably ''interminable'' struggle for human rights - for the same ''humanitarian, moral and political principles that gave birth to the United States of America,'' as he put it in a speech here to the 20th anniversary dinner of Amnesty International. And nowhere, in any society or any political system, whether of left or right, are those principles more systematically violated today than they are in Argentina. In that light, what does it matter if one or five or ten Jews or Christians or agnostics are tortured? No one denies that the violations occur, in many nations and on a grand scale in Argentina; they are what matters and what Mr. Timerman attacks in his book and other public utterances. So clear is the situation, in so many countries of whatever political leaning, he told the Amnesty group, that ''no one any longer dares to deny the need for governments and private institutions to defend the human rights of individuals and societies.'' Instead, those ''who used to be openly opposed to the struggle for human rights now choose to employ mechanisms of deception but not of opposition'' - for example, ''the thesis of 'quiet diplomacy' or ... the difference between authoritarian and totalitarian governments.'' These tactics, Mr. Timerman believes, are at the root of the criticism suddenly being showered on him in this country by neoconservative publicists. His testimony has tended to make their ''mechanisms of deception'' look like the shabby intellectual frauds they are; hence, they have tried to discredit that testimony by accusing him of ''exaggerating'' anti-Semitism and by associating him with the questionable activities of his former financial backer. Specifically, Mr. Timerman's description of the human rights situation in Argentina calls sharply into question the neoconservatives' and the Reagan Administration's favorite theory - Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick's dubious formulation of a difference between ''authoritarian'' regimes of the right and ''totalitarian'' societies of the left. The former are held to be tolerable because they are ''friendly'' to the U.S. and may eventually grow into democracies. Even while events in Poland have shown that forms of democracy can rise in totalitarian systems - despite the neo-conservative theory - Jacobo Timerman has been showing how unlikely it is that anything like democracy is going to develop in merely ''authoritarian'' Argentina, while the military holds power. He also points out that Argentina has never been particularly ''friendly'' to the United States - entering World War II, for example, only a few weeks before the collapse of Germany. Even now, Argentina ships 60 percent of its exports - mostly grain and meat - to the Soviet Union and receives Soviet help and technology in a vast power dam construction program. ''The Soviet Union has been the only important world power never to formulate one single protest against the violation of human rights in Argentina,'' Mr. Timerman told the Amnesty audience.  Moreover, ''the Argentine Communists maintain that the support of the so-called moderate military in Argentina has permitted an improvement in the situation of human rights.'' Mr. Timerman derided supporters of the Reagan Administration's ''quiet diplomacy,'' who compare ''the absence of disappearances (in Argentina) in 1981 with the 28 disappearances in 1980 ... if we accept this mathematical formula, we can also say that the Carter Administration reduced the disappearances from 15,000 to 28 ....'' As for himself, Mr. Timerman said, ''I am a former political prisoner persecuted for his ideas, a former Jewish prisoner tortured for his origins, a survivor of the clandestine prisons of Argentina.  I do not come to present theories. I come to give personal testimony.'' None of the critics who ask more of him can say as much."
