"The book in which he tells of his torture in Argentina was waved by a senator before the television cameras in the packed committee room and he was greeted with a thunderous ovation when the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee acknowledged his presence at the hearing. But Jacobo Timerman, the Argentine publisher who was jailed for 20 months and then stripped of his citizenship before being allowed to emigrate to Israel, declined to testify today at the confirmation hearings on Ernest W. Lefever, President Reagan's nominee for the post of Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs. However, Mr. Timerman has become an important instrument for those seeking to block Mr. Lefever's confirmation on the ground that he is a hard-line anti-Communist who has demonstrated insufficient concern about human rights abuses in non-Marxist countries. Administration officials have conceded privately that if the committee vote were held tomorrow the nomination would be defeated.  The committee will vote after the Memorial Day recess ending June 1, and Democrats predict that the nomination will be defeated and will have to be resurrected on the Senate floor. 20 Testify at Hearing Today, the second day of the hearings, the committee heard testimony from more than 20 legislators and private citizens. Mr.  Lefever was not present. Representative Charles Wilson, Democrat of Texas, endorsed Mr. Lefever's strategy of ''quiet diplomacy'' in dealing with human rights violations by American allies and criticized what he termed the Carter Administration's ''sermonizing and preaching'' as ineffective. Senator John Tower, Republican of Texas, said he believed the Reagan Administration would adopt a ''more realistic, more balanced'' human rights policy rather than a ''dual standard which has berated the human rights shortcomings of our friends and ignored the brutal oppression of our enemies.'' Arguing against the nomination, Representative Don Bonker, Democrat of Washington, said that European allies were already ''dismayed and disappointed'' by what they perceived as a softening of the nation's commitment to a staunch human rights policy. Carter Policies at Issue Much of today's debate focused not only on Mr. Lefever's qualifications but also on the nature and effectiveness of the Carter Administration's policies on human rights. As a result, Mr.  Timerman's presence at the hearing and his meetings with journalists, legislators, and human rights groups here have been a significant factor. In a meeting with two Democratic members of the committee last night and in interviews with journalists today, Mr. Timerman credited the Carter Administration's vigorous human rights spokesman, Patricia M. Derian, with gaining his release from prison and the Carter policies with saving ''thousands and thousands of lives all over the world.'' Mr. Timerman, who was editor in chief and publisher of La Opinion, a Buenos Aires newspaper that inquired into the disappearance of thousands of Argentines in the 1970's, told reporters at the hearing: ''Silent diplomacy is silence. ''Quiet diplomacy is surrender.'' While he declined to testify at the committee hearing, Mr. Timerman said this morning that Mr. Lefever's confirmation would send a signal to the world. ''If Lefever is defeated, it will mean that Americans are not going back to the era of the cold war and McCarthy,'' he told reporters at a meeting sponsored by the Carnegie Endowment."
