"The House Foreign Affairs Committee voted today to impose restrictions on United States military aid to El Salvador that would require President Reagan to provide assurances that ''indiscriminate torture and murder'' by Salvadoran security forces is being brought under control. By a vote of 26 to 7, the committee adopted an amendment to the foreign assistance bill that reflected deep concern over the violation of human rights in El Salvador. The bill contains a request for $25 million in military assistance to the Salvadoran civilianmilitary junta for fiscal 1982. The amendment would require that President Reagan certify, in two semiannual reports to the Speaker of the House, that the Government of El Salvador is not engaged in a consistent pattern of violations of human rights and is achieving substantial control over all elements of its armed forces so as ''to bring to an end the indiscriminate torture and murder of Salvadoran citizens by these forces.'' Progress on Changes Demanded The President would also be required to certify that El Salvador is making progress on essential economic and political changes, including a land redistribution program, is committed to holding free elections at an early date, and has demonstrated its willingness to negotiate with opposition groups over an equitable political resolution to the conflict. The amendment, sponsored by liberal Democrats, was widely supported by Republican committee members, including William S.  Broomfield of Missouri, the the ranking minority member.  It was the first major Congressional test for the Administration on the expanded military assistance program under which 56 United States military advisers have been assigned to the Salvadoran armed forces. Arms Flow Said to Increase Reagan Administration officials said today that the flow of arms to rebels in El Salvador had increased again after a lull. The officials said the arms were moving from Cuba by sea to Honduras and then overland to El Salvador. (Page A14.) In El Salvador today, two journalists, one of them an American, were wounded and a Salvadoran interpreter was killed during an army sweep in a San Salvador suburb. More than 12,000 people have been killed in El Salvador in the past 18 months in an armed struggle between left-wing guerrillas, who are trying to overthrow the Government of President Jose Napoleon Duarte, and the Salvadoran military and right-wing ''death squads''. Representative Jonathan B. Bingham, Democrat of New York, who cosponsored the resolution, said that the conditions attached to military aid were ''intended to be helpful to what President Duarte is trying to do.'' Human rights advocates and church groups here have been critical of United States support for President Duarte's Government because of such incidents as the killing of three American Roman Catholic nuns and a lay social worker in December. A march on the Pentagon to protest United States military assistance to the Duarte Government has been organized for Sunday by Committees of Solidarity with El Salvador, which have been established in many cities in the United States. James L. Buckley, Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, testifying today on behalf of an emergency allocation of $63 million in economic aid to El Salvador, said that atrocities attributed to Salvadoran security forces existed because ''that Government doesn't have total control over its own forces.'' But Mr. Buckley said that any delay in providing ''quickly deployable funds'' to relieve unemployment and finance the importation of vital food and raw materials ''could topple the government.'' Representative Clarence D. Long, Democrat of Maryland, chairman of the House Appropriations subcommittee on foreign operations, told Mr. Buckley that the emergency funds would be approved, but he warned that ''our money is going down a bottomless pit'' unless economic conditions are stabilized. In addition to $25 million in military aid requested for the coming fiscal year, the Administration's foreign aid bill calls for $40 million in economic support funds, $35 million in development aid, and $16 million in Government-subsidized food sales. Two Journalists Are Shot SAN SALVADOR, April 29 (AP) - Two journalists, one of them an American, were wounded and a Salvadoran interpreter was killed today during an army sweep of an area attacked by leftist guerrillas near this capital city. The wounded were Joaquin Zuniga, an Associated Press photographer, and George Thurlow, a 29-year-old reporter for The Daily Democrat in Woodland, Calif., who was on a working vacation in El Salvador. Mr.  Zuniga was shot in the leg and Mr. Thurlow had a shoulder wound, the authorities said. The dead man was identified as Gilberto Moran, 27 years old, Mr. Thurlow's interpreter. The source of the fire was unclear. A witness said the three were shot as they walked in a narrow street in the Aguascalientes area in Soyopango, about four miles southeast of the capital where a group of guerrillas had attacked a power substation. The area had been cordoned off by soldiers after the guerrilla attack about two hours earlier, witnesses said."
