"Argentina's top foreign policy priority is to improve relations with the United States and Europe, but not at the expense of changing its approach to human rights, according to Oscar Camilion, the country's new Foreign Minister. At the same time, while Argentina considers itself part of the ''Western world,'' Mr Camilion said in an interview last week, it will maintain an independent posture toward the Soviet Union. It will continue to export grain and meat to the Soviet Union and import Soviet heavy water for its nuclear reactors, he said. Mr. Camilion said the Argentine military wanted spare parts for its American-made equipment and military training for its men. But, he said, the most important benefit of resumed close military relations would be personal contact among senior officers. The 51-year-old Mr. Camilion, the former Ambassador to Brazil, became Foreign Minister with the inauguration of Roberto Eduardo Viola as President two weeks ago. An urbane man, he is a member of a small party headed by former President Arturo Frondizi and is the first civilian to hold the Foreign Minister's post since the military took power in a coup five years ago. Internal Policies Defended General Viola fought to have a civilian Foreign Minister in hopes of ending the interservice rivalry in the ministry that largely paralyzed it in the past. Mr. Camilion defended the country's present internal policies as strongly as his predecessor, Gen. Carlos Washington Pastor.  The Reagan Administration has moved quickly to repair relations with the Argentine Government, which were chilly under the Carter Administration because of human rights abuses. The Administration has asked Congress to end an arms embargo and is sending a string of generals and admirals on visits. The Administration contends that the human rights situation has improved and that Argentina would be strategically important in a confrontation with the Soviet Union. But Argentina's huge export trade with the Soviet Union was begun despite the United States call for a grain embargo last year after the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. The Reagan Administration is wavering over continuing the grain embargo, but Mr. Camilion made clear that regardless of the Administration's decision, Argentina will follow its national interest. In the interview last Thursday, Mr. Camilion said of the arms embargo: ''It is a matter of principle. We can live with it, though we prefer to put aside this small hindrance. It is not a very friendly initiative.'' U.S. 'a Traditional Friend' ''We hope to re-establish normal relations with the United States,'' he said. ''The United States is a traditional friend and it is an important country with which we have lots in common.'' But, he continued, ''we are more interested in establishing fraternity inside Argentine society than in diplomatic negotiations and small problems with other countries because of so-called human rights.'' ''We Argentines will reach our goal of national conciliation,'' he said. ''We will create reasonable stability in our institutions and the world will sooner or later accept the way we Argentines find to live with ourselves.'' Mr. Camilion said on human rights that he sees a change of approach under the Reagan Administration rather than one of substance. In American foreign policy. he sees a more low-keyed approach than under Mr. Carter, he said. Argentina has the highest standard of living in Latin America but remains active in parleys of the so-called third world. It frequently adopts policies counter to those of the United States on international issues, such as votes in the United Nations, but it is clear from the military cooperation it seeks with the West and the staunch anti-Communism of the Government that it is pro-Western at home. Exercises 'an End in Themselves' Nonetheless, though the Argentine Navy is likely to participate is two American-sponsored regional naval exercises this summer, Mr.  Camilion stressed that participation did not commit Argentina to any system of defending the South Atlantic sea lanes against Soviet interdiction, which is the Reagan Administration's concern. ''These exercises are an end in themselves,'' he said.  The Soviet Union bought 58 percent of Argentina's grain exports last year and also became the country's major meat export market.This year Argentina is expected to sell the Soviet Union eight million tons of the country's projected harvest of 34 million tons of grains, though a five-year agreement signed last year was for only 4.5 million tons a year. The exports are crucial to the country's balance of payments and fill a void created by the sharp cutback of European meat and grain purchases under the Common Market. ''It's a case of necessity, of normal trade relations,'' said Mr.  Camilion. The balance of trade with the Soviet Union is greatly in Argentina's favor, unlike that with the United States, but Argenina did buy five tons of heavy water from the Soviet Union late last year. Argentina has a large nuclear energy program that draws on technology and equipment from many countries. Argentina, however, has not signed the international nuclear nonproliferation treaty or a regional treaty banning nuclear weapons. Its refusal to do so for reasons of national independence was a source of friction with the Carter Administration. It is unclear whether the Reagan Administration will put pressure on the Argentines, but Mr. Camilion said the country would continue its present nuclear development policies as part of its goal to become an industrial power by the end of the century."
