"The Costa Rican Government, after the explosion of two terrorist bombs in San Jose last month, has begun a campaign against foreign political exiles, who have traditionally sought refuge in this tiny Central American democracy. Despite strong protests by liberal groups in Costa Rica, six Guatemalan opposition leaders were deported to neighboring Nicaragua last Wednesday after being held in jail for more than two weeks. And since the two terrorist bombs exploded in San Jose last March 17, injuring three United States Marine guards and damaging the Honduran Embassy, a total of 36 foreign exiles, mainly Nicaraguans and Salvadorans but including some Argentines and Hondurans, have been expelled from Costa Rica. Further, the Office of Judicial Investigation, the country's federal detective corps, has raided the offices of several human rights organizations in San Jose, while foreign priests working with refugees have complained of receiving threats. Foreign Terrorists Blamed The Costa Rican authorities, who believe that foreign terrorists were responsible for last month's bombings, have argued that many of those deported were in Costa Rica illegally or were involved in ''subversive'' activities. They have also announced plans to tighten controls on the entry of political exiles, many of whom arrive as tourists. At present, there are said to be some 10,000 refugees in Costa Rica, most of them fleeing from the political violence in El Salvador. But there are also a considerable number of Nicaraguans who left their homes after the 1979 Nicaraguan revolution and Guatemalans who have been forced out of their country by death threats. For the last 30 years, Costa Rica has traditionally given asylum to exiles of all political leanings. But especially for Central Americans opposed to the region's dictatorships, it has been an important haven and, as the only democracy in the area, has long been held up by them as a political model to be emulated. For two years before they ousted the regime of President Anastasio Somoza Debayle, Nicaragua's Sandinist guerrillas were even allowed to use Costa Rican territory as a base for political propaganda and even for training their recruits. In the last 18 months, however, the political mood of Costa Rica has moved sharply to the right and exiled Guatemalan and Salvadoran leaders have found their political activities increasingly restricted. Late last year, El Salvador's opposition Democratic Revolutionary Front moved its external headquarters from Costa Rica to Mexico. While keeping a low profile, however, the external commission of Guatemala's Democratic Front Against Repression, the country's main opposition coalition, remained in San Jose, although it was rarely able to publish its political statements in Costa Rican newspapers. On the afternoon of March 24, the police raided the front's office in a local Protestant church and, apparently without an arrest warrant, detained six Guatemalan leaders, including Israel Marquez and Miguel-Angel Albizures, both prominent trade union leaders. The authorities claimed to have found ''subversive material'' - opposition sources said the seized documents were merely mailing lists and press clippings - and last Wednesday, after appeals on behalf of the detainees had been denied, the six were expelled to Nicaragua."
