"Some of the worst dictatorial traits of ''Papa Doc,'' the father of Haiti's President, Jean-Claude Duvalier, have reappeared with a vengeance. ''Baby Doc'' has imprisoned hundreds of opposition leaders, publishers and journalists on charges of subversion. The Carter Administration has protested but President-elect Reagan's transition advisers want the next Administration to play down official reactions to human rights violations. Yet the reverberations of the Haitians' plight -in Haiti and throughout the hemisphere - deny the United States the luxury of detachment. For a generation, Francois Duvalier (the father) and despotism were synonymous. Repression, torture and censorship crushed all opposition and drove thousands of talented Haitians into exile.  Jean-Claude Duvalier eased up, releasing political prisoners, tolerating rival parties and letting the press speak more freely. But in the last year or so, he has reasserted the genetic code of tyranny. First he imposed new censorship laws, but enforced them loosely. A year ago, he brutally broke up a human rights rally. With last weekend's mass arrests, he ended all pretense of free speech. Why the change? Haiti's economy, the sickest in the Americas, has turned even sicker. There are now acute shortages of foreign exchange and therefore of goods. Millions of dollars in foreign aid have been hopelessly mismanaged - or siphoned off by corrupt officials.  Apparently, the Government felt it essential to silence critics before this week's crucial visit by officials of the International Monetary Fund. Repression notwithstanding, poverty and discord are increasing. So is the flight of desperate refugees. In other words, it will not accomplish much to hoot at the failure of Washington's human rights policy. If Americans do not raise their voices on behalf of the Haitians in Haiti, more and more of them will find their way to America. Incompetence in and repression by the Duvalier Government can only e xac erbate the problem. The United States has ample reason to help Haiti strengthen its economy and to prevail upon its leaders to restore civil rights. If America is unable or unwilling to get Baby Doc to relax his grip, the people of both countries will feel the squeeze."
