"A physicist and his wife, a chemist, talk quietly in their apartment as sunlight filters through the white chiffon curtains. The light dapples the hardwood floors and the books stacked on corner tables. The couple, who sit on worn furniture, speak with a modesty that belies their reading, but because of their ideas on human rights they are being persecuted. In 1977, several days after receiving an award for his contribution in physics to his country, Jose Federico Westerkamp lost his tenure at the National University of Buenos Aires. Last year, he lost his university position altogether. Last month he was arrested with five others, spent a week in jail and now is under ''provisional release.'' Mr. Westerkamp, who spent two years at Columbia University in New York City on research fellowships, has received public support from scientists around the world. He believes the outcry led to the the release of himself and his colleagues. 'Same Methods' as Soviet Mr. Westerkamp is neither an extreme leftist nor a revolutionary.  He is, however, seeking the release of his son, who has been in prison for more than five years although no charges have ever been filed against him. ''The case of Argentina is very similar to the Russian one,'' the 63-year old Mr. Westerkamp said in a recent interview. ''One is far right, the other is far left, but they use the same methods.'' The similarity between the Soviet Union and here is mostly in the treatment of human rights activists. There is certainly far more freedom, particularly economic, in Argentina. Nonetheless, almost all political activity here is illegal and politcal parties are banned, though their leaders continue to meet. The press exercises selfcensorship and editors are regularly called to the Pink House, the presidential headquarters, to speak with the general who monitors them. Although Argentines have become vociferous in their complaints against the military Government's economic policy, most are afraid to attack the military itself. There is, however, no apparent general desire to change the Government. Charged With Having Maps Mr. Westerkamp and the five others were arrested in police raids on their homes and the small office of the Center for Legal and Social Studies, which they organized. The one year-old center has been attempting to use the law and the military-controlled judiciary to correct human rights abuses. The activists were charged with having maps of military installations, but the maps shown in court were simple sketches that had been presented to international human rights groups to show where many missing people were last reported seen in the hands of security forces. The six were arrested in March several days before Roberto Eduardo Viola, then President-designate, went to the United States to meet with President Reagan. The Reagan Administration is requesting that Congress repeal a law that has denied Argentina military aid since 1978 because of human rights abuses by the security forces.  Washington now feels that the human rights situation has improved. Since the Argentine military took power five years ago, thousands of people - responsible estimates range from 6,000 to more than 15,000 - have disappeared when in the hands of the security forces.  The practice has now all but stopped; 28 disappearances were reported last year and none have been reported yet this year, according to human rights groups. But the Government refuses to account for the missing. A Message for the President Human rights leaders here say that, according to their contacts, the arrests were not known beforehand by either either President Viola or his predecessor, Jorge Rafael Videla, but were carried out by elements within the armed forces to send a message to General Viola. The two men, they say, are too practical to create a major issue for minor reasons. But even with the change of administrations here, the activists say that the practicality does not extend to an accounting of the missing and the release of the more than 900 prisoners being held without charges, including Mr. Westerkamp's son. The son, Gustavo, was a 23-year old economics student at the National University of Buenos Aires in 1975 when he was called to sign up for the draft. He had been deferred until then as a student. According to his father, he was reluctant to serve and could have sought a further deferment, but he went to the army recruiting office anyway. On his way home, he was seized by plainclothesmen in an unmarked car. Isabel Martinez de Peron was President then and the country was in political and economic chaos. The army was fighting leftist terrorists. Gustavo shared the leftist fervor that had swept most universities and participated in some of the daily demonstrations.  ''But he never had anything to do with the terrorists,'' his father said. ''And if the Government had something on him, he would be charged.'' Military Changes the Law The country was then, as now, under a state of siege that gives the President the constitutional right to order an arrest without charges. The prisoner, however, also has the right to leave the country if he requests. A federal judge allowed Gustavo that right, but 10 days later the military staged its coup. The judge was dismissed and Gustavo is still in jail. The new Government instituted a law under which requests for exile must go to the President. In January, the Westerkamps submitted their fifth request, the first four having been turned down for unspecifed ''security reasons''. ''We do not know if he is going to be in jail one year more or 20 years more,'' said his mother, Angela, a retired chemistry professor.  Mr. Westerkamp, acting as his own attorney, also has been seeking writs of habeas corpus and various court orders that might give his son the right to exile. He has been turned down, but has one case before a three-judge panel, known as ''Room One,'' in the Court of Appeals. For two and a half years he has been going back and forth to ''Room One'' keeping the case alive. ''We do not believe in things like justice and trials anymore,'' said Mrs. Westerkamp. ''It is all a farce.'' Daughter Disappears Mr. Westerkamp's activity put him in league with others, such as Emilio F. Mignone, whose daughter was taken from his home one night four years ago and has not been heard from since. They helped form the Permanent Assembly for Human Rights and then the Center for Legal and Social Studies. During the interview, Mr. Mignone, who was among the six arrested, burst into the Westerkamp apartment, unshaven and bedraggled, and with little greetings grabbed a copy of that day's newspaper to find an article on a union organizer who had been detained. He punched the paper at quotations from a police chief who had said the man was a common criminal. Later, more settled, he said, ''The military believes they are above morality, above the rules of the world.''"
