"The Reagan Administration is sending a number of American military leaders to court Argentina, but the human rights situation that marred relations in the past remains unpredictable. The visits have raised the prospect of close military cooperation, although Congress has yet to lift the ban on arms sales and other military assistance to Argentina that it imposed more than two years ago because of human rights abuses. According to human rights leaders here, assassinations and disappearances appear to have all but stopped. Torture, however, remains common, all political activity is illegal, the press is controlled, and more than 900 Argentines still languish in jail after five years without having been charged. Last month, six human rights leaders and 67 mothers of people who have disappeared were arrested in separate incidents. They have since been released. Gen. Edward C. Meyer, the United States Army Chief of Staff, is now on a six-day tour of Argentine military facilities. According to Argentine officils, he has concluded a verbal agreement on consultation between the United States and Argentine armies. ''This will facilitate political, military and institutional cooperation - and everything you can imagine - between our two countries,'' said an Argentine Army spokesman, Rear Adm. Peter K. Cullins, commander of the United States South Atlantic forces, was here last week and Adm. Harry Train, commander in chief of the Atlantic Fleet and Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic, is expected next week, though plans for the visit are still tentative. Brig. Gen. Richard A. Ingram, commander of the Air Force Command and Staff School, is also scheduled to visit here next week. A Change in Policy The visits are in contrast to policy under the Carter Administration, whose relations with Argentina were chilly because of human rights abuses. Reasons for the change, Reagan Administration officials have said, are that the arms embargo is counterproductive and human rights in Argentina have improved. The United States Embassy here has adopted the quiet diplomacy on human rights that the Administration says it prefers. The day after the six human rights leaders, organizers of the Center for Legal and Social Studies, were arrested last month, Ambassador Harry W.  Shlaudeman visited the Foreign Ministry. He refused to make public statements, but human rights leaders say the strong protests by him here and by Administration officials in Washington were instrumental in getting the six provisionally released a week later. Arrests Called a Test ''The military was testing the Reagan Administration,'' said Emilio F. Mignone, one of those arrested.  Mr. Mignone, a former university rector, and other human rights leaders here say that in some ways the Reagan Administration was more effective in getting the arrested human rights leaders and mothers released than the Carter Administration might have been, but they fear such effectiveness may be temporary. ''The Reagan Administration was good for us because there existed the Carter Administration,'' Mr. Mignone said. ''This Administration can relieve the pressure Carter put on and thus had something to offer in bargaining to get us out of jail.'' The human rights leaders said they feared, however, that if arms supplies resume and relations improve there will be no more carrots with which to influence the Argentine Government. ''I prefer the Carter Administration policy,'' said Jose Federico Westerkamp, a physicist who was also among the arrested six. ''It irritated the military, but it saved many lives.'' New President Takes Over Last week, Gen. Roberto Eduardo Viola was inaugurated as President by the ruling military junta, succeeding Gen. Jorge Rafael Videla.  General Viola is expected to further curb some human rights abuses and lead the country toward democracy. The arrests last month, however, coming just before General Viola went to the United States to meet with President Reagan, are being widely interpreted here as signs from rightists in the military that the junta, not General Viola, has the final say. Human rights activists also note that General Viola was Commander in Chief of the army in 1978, at the height of the disappearances.  More than 6,000 people have been reported missing to the courts since the junta took power in a coup five years ago, and human rights groups estimate that the actual number of those who disappeared when in the hands of the security forces is probably more than 15,000. Most are presumed dead, but an accounting of the missing is an issue that is growing here. Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, and other senators have said General Viola promised during his visit to the United States to produce a partial accounting.  General Viola, however, has been insisting in public statements that he made no such promise. The visit of General Viola to the White House last month illustrated the wish of the two new administrations to improve relations. The bulk of the Argentine military wants to be considered part of the Western world. The air force also wants to replace its aging fleet of F-4's, and the other services need spare parts for their older American equipment. Navy Planning Exercises The Reagan Administration for its part is according Argentina a new strategic importance in the South Atlantic. The United States Navy is planning two major exercises this summer and wants to include the Argentine Navy. General Meyer has made no public statements here, but even Argentine officials privately marvel that a member of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is spending six days in a country formerly considered of only modest strategic importance. In a toast last night on receiving the Grand Cross of the Order of May, an Argentine military award, General Meyer said, ''Being developed and sovereign, our two countries are concerned with the maintenance of peace and stability.''"
