"Administration officials said today that President Reagan was considering a request to Congress to repeal the embargo on military aid to Argentina. The officials made the statement after Mr. Reagan met with Gen.  Roberto Viola, who has been designated to become Argentina's president on March 29. Mr. Reagan said that he had a ''good discussion'' with the Argentine leader and that he looked forward ''to efforts by both Governments to further improve our relations.'' ''I have extended to General Viola my best wishes for his tenure as president,'' Mr. Reagan said.  Earlier today, General Viola met informally with members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Capitol Hill, where he was said to have pledged to make more of an effort to identify some of the 6,000 people reported to have been arrested or abducted by Argentine security forces. Administration officials have said that General Viola's visit with Mr. Reagan is part of a general effort to improve relations with right-wing military governments in South America. The human rights record of Argentina's Government, which took power in 1976, was condemned last year by the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, a group that documented the disappearance of more than 6,000 people. Argentina has not been able to receive American military aid since 1978, when Congress amended the Foreign Assistance Act that year and imposed a ban on such aid. The Carter Administration, in pursuit of its human rights goals, held Argentina at arm's length. Reagan Administration officials, however, have been emphasizing the strategic importance they attach to Argentina, particularly in terms of South Atlantic naval security. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., testifying in Congress today on other matters, confirmed to reporters that the ban on military aid was being reviewed. ''We are looking at the situation with respect to the provision of armaments to Argentina now, but there has been no decision,'' he said. Larry Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary, also confirmed the review today. Mr. Reagan's visit with General Viola came at the end of a day in which the President met with Republican leaders in Congress to discuss his economic program and had lunch at the Irish Embassy in honor of St. Patrick's Day. In a statement issued at the White House, Mr. Reagan not only took note of the holiday but also went somewhat further than he had in the past in condemning ''all acts of terrorism and violence'' in Northern Ireland. ''I call on all Americans to question closely any appeal for financial or other aid from groups involved in this conflict to insure that contributions do not end up in the hands of those who perpetuate violence, either directly or indirectly,'' the President's statement said. Mr. Reagan met with General Viola in the Oval Office, along with the Argentine Ambassador to the United States, Jorge A. Aja Espil, and the United States Ambassador to Buenos Aires, Harry W.  Schlaudeman. Mr. Haig was also in attendance, as was Vernon A.  Walters, a retired general and former deputy director of Central Intelligence, who recently made a trip on behalf of the Reagan Administration to visit with leaders of Argentina, Chile and Brazil to seek support for United States military aid to El Salvador. After his visit with members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, General Viola drew some praise from Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island and a strong supporter of the Carter Administration's human rights policies. Last month Senator Pell and several other Senators visited Argentina and requested that General Viola's Government make an effort to identify those missing and suspected of having been abducted or killed by the Government. Today Senator Pell said General Viola had committed himself to listing those whom the Government knew had died since they disappeared. ''General Viola seemed intent on improving Argentina's image in the field of human rights,'' Senator Pell said, adding that the Mr. Viola had also confirmed the release of two prominent Argentines, Emilio Mignone and Augusto Conde McDonnell, who had been detained. Senator Charles H. Percy, the Illinois Republican who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, reported after the meeting that he had raised another matter of concern to the Reagan Administration - Argentina's refusal to go along with the grain embargo to the Soviet Union. Senator Percy called on Argentina to back up its condemnation of the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan with a commitment to support a grain embargo."
