"When the long-ruling Somoza regime was ousted after a civil war in July 1979, the new Sandinist leadership pledged to respect human rights and promised a ''generous revolution'' in which captured National Guardsmen would not be tortured or executed. But it took the Government many months to restore order and control former guerrillas bent on revenging the brutality of the National Guard. During this period of chaos, officials now concede, several hundred prisoners were summarily executed. ''It was not our policy, but it happened anyway,'' said Tomas Borge Martinez, the Interior Minister. ''It took time and patience to persuade our own supporters that we fought the revolution to put an end to such abuses, that we really meant to respect human dignity.'' Now, however, human rights have again become an issue in Nicaragua, this time as part of a deeper political struggle between the Sandinist rulers and their conservative critics in the private sector, the church and independent political parties. Charge Enrages Government The controversy began when Jose Esteban Gonzalez, the secretary general of the Permanent Human Rights Commission, said after an audience with Pope John Paul II in Rome in early February that ''the Sandinist regime applies methods of torture and repression very similar to those applied in the past by the Somoza dictatorship.'' The Government was enraged. It accused Mr. Gonzalez, a member of the opposition Social Christian Party, of using ''lies that prejudice Nicaragua's image abroad and encourage counterrevolutionary activities.'' But the Sandinists then acted alone to damage their reputation.  They ordered the closing of the human rights commission, then allowed it to reopen four days later after a wave of protests. When Mr.  Gonzalez returned from Rome, he was met at the airport by a mob of pro-Government protesters and, a week later, was arrested and charged with assorted crimes against the state. Numerous foreign governments protested, and the Government appeared to have second thoughts. Mr. Gonzalez was persuaded to issue a statement that his remarks in Rome had been ''misinterpreted.'' The judge in charge of the case then ordered his release and the charges were dropped. 'Broad Picture' Is Cited But the storm over Mr. Gonzalez's arrest distracted attention from both the progress and shortcomings in the regime's human rights record. ''I tell people not to judge the revolution by one incident, but by the broad picture,'' said Eden Pastora, a Sandinist commander and Deputy Defense Minister. ''If you compare this revolution with the French, Mexican, Algerian, Cuban or Iranian revolutions, this one has been carried out by angels.'' Most senior National Guard officers in the ousted regime, as well as Gen. Anastasio Somoza Debayle and his family, fled the country.  But some 7,000 or so National Guardsmen, security agents and suspected police informers were detained, many after surrendering to the local Red Cross. Once the summary executions and mistreatment of prisoners were brought under control, the main problem lay in the overcrowding of the jails. ''I once took some American Congressmen to see the prisoners,'' Commander Borge said, ''and even I was shocked by the filthy conditions in which they were living. This was the terrible reality. We didn't have proper jails or enough resources. I said we'd accept all the help that was offered.'' Within weeks of the revolution the Government began releasing hundreds of prisoners, although it stopped for a while after angry protests from relatives of people killed or tortured by the National Guard. ''It was very difficult to investigate each case properly,'' an official said. ''We had innocent people in jail and freed some who were clearly guilty.'' Special Tribunals Set Up By December 1979, special tribunals had been set up to try the prisoners. The trials were often hasty and, while charges were dropped against some 1,000 prisoners, about one-quarter of the 4,000 found guilty were sentenced to the maximum prison term of 30 years.  The tribunals have recently completed their work and have been dissolved. ''The guards were assassins, thieves, torturers and rapists,'' said Commander Borge, whose first wife was murdered by the National Guard and who was himself tortured while in jail. ''But when it came to the trials, it turned out that they were all cooks, mechanics, sweepers, hairdressers and typists. No one ever fired a shot.'' The Government nevertheless seems eager to reintegrate as many prisoners as possible into society.  Before Christmas last year, 512 prisoners were freed under an amnesty, while 900 more have voluntered to pick cotton this winter in the knowledge that their sentences will be reduced. Yet, while only 4,170 Somocistas are still being held, conditions in the jails remain difficult, above all because budget cutbacks often result in only one meal -of rice, beans and salad - being served each day. ''The International Red Cross has been giving us $50,000 a month for food and medicine,'' a prison warden said, ''but that ends next month.'' Recent amnesties have relieved some of the overcrowding, but the Tipitapa Prison, built in 1969 for 1,000 detainees, still has 2,143 inmates, with five people to cells only 12 feet long and five feet wide. A foreign reporter who was allowed to visit these jails and talk privately to prisoners heard no stories of torture and only occasional complaints about individual guards who, out of sight of their superiors, mistreated inmates. One young guard whose aggressive behavior was recently reported to the authorities was immediately reassigned. Commander Borge recognized, though, that much still has to be done to train not only prison guards, but also policemen and soldiers.  ''At first, we had no police so we took almost anyone,'' he explained. ''I think half the criminals in Nicaragua finished up in the police. So we've had to purge and purge.'' Complaints Are Still Made The country's new judicial system is also in its infancy and is still struggling to assert its authority over the security apparatus. There are, for example, continuing complaints of arbitrary arrests by the political police followed by long periods of detention without trial. But the mood of the country is more relaxed today than it was under the Somoza regime, with most Nicaraguans clearly unafraid of the Sandinist authorities. ''A Government is either for or against human rights,'' said Commander Borge, ''and, despite our mistakes, which we admit, we are for human rights.'' Alfonso Robelo Callejas, an opponent of the Somoza regime who resigned from the ruling junta and is now its principal critic, seemed to endorse this view. ''I feel 10 times more secure now than I did under Somoza,'' he said. ''I don't feel threatened today.''"
