"''They toasted the news with champagne,'' says an Argentine democrat, speaking of his hard-line countrymen. ''They saw the change in American policy literally as a hunting license.'' To the Reagan Administration, this judgment of its new human rights policy will seem harsh, and premature. But tell that to the hunted, the eight courageous, nonpolitical leaders of Argentina's human rights movement arrested last weekend; five are still held, incommunicado. The crackdown was ordered by a single judge, whose officers also raided the movement's offices and seized files listing 6,000 missing persons. That the judge is supposedly a maverick hardly exonerates the military Government. One of the scandals of Argentina has been the political perversion of the judiciary. The whole point of the human rights campaign has been to make courts account for the thousands who have either vanished altogether or are still kept in prisons where torture is common. Even worse, the roundup came just after Argentina had been alerted to a shift in Washington's attitude toward repression in Latin America. In Geneva, the United States joined Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay in a vote to terminate a United Nations inquiry into human rights in Chile when it might have abstained, as did England and France. A Reagan representative also was reportedly instructed to vote, if necessary, against a parallel investigation of Argentina.  Some deft French diplomacy gave him a way out. In Washington, the State Department is taking a different way out - saying nothing critical of Argentina. Under its new policy, remonstrances, if any, will be private. Why such solicitude? Unlike South Korea, Argentina is not a strategic ally. It is a member of the nonaligned bloc; it ignored America's call for an embargo on grain shipments to the Soviet Union. Moscow returns the compliment; it, too, wants to shield Argentina from international disapproval. Strictly speaking, the Administration is right; the human rights policy - standing up against torture, against wholesale disappearances and against state-promoted terrorism - has been interventionist. But by doing nothing, the United States also intervenes. Silence is construed by hard-liners as assent, and by democrats as abandonment. And the hard-liners, who talk airily of Argentina's ''Western values,'' work against the conciliatory efforts of Gen. Roberto Viola, who is scheduled to become President on March 20. Reflective Argentines are trying to live down the awful 1970's; the left-wing terrorist campaign has ebbed, and there have been far fewer disappearances - thanks in good part to the human rights campaign. It ought to be the purpose of American diplomacy to encourage this evolution. By standing mute, the Reagan Adminstration says it doesn't really care. It is a shaming silence."
