"When an authoritarian regime stages a plebiscite, the exercise typically ends with an announcement that 99.95 percent of the voters answered ''Yes!'' The news from Uruguay this week is therefore refreshing. By a margin of almost 7 to 5, voters there said ''No!'' to a new constitution designed to guarantee permanent control over Government decisions by the military. The charter was rejected despite active electioneering by the country's military rulers. The voters thus demonstrated that years of repression have not yet snuffed out the democratic spirit in South America's southern cone. Military rule in Uruguay dates back to 1973, when economic troubles and urban terrorists finally proved too much for what was once the continent's most impressively democratic state. Until the 1960's, Uruguay had enjoyed the reputation of being like Switzerland -a civilized place and a haven for refugees from the violent politics of neighboring lands. All that seemed to have changed irrevocably as Uruguay became one more police state in a region of notorious police states. With a population of just 3 million, it achieved in the 1970's one of the world's highest ratios of political prisoners per capita. The nation's congress has been closed for seven years; the main political parties are banned. A siege mentality prevails among the security forces, even though terrorism, the pretext for repression, has long since been eradicated. Dictatorship gained momentum on its own. The generals presented their new constitution just a mon th before sending it to the voters for approval. Opportunities to ca mpaign against the charter were severely circumscribed; known opp onents of the regime were disfranchised. As always in Uruguay, all o ther civilians were required to vote, and ballots that said ''Y es'' to thecharter were printed in the national color. Nonetheless, t he people said ''No.'' The ruling generals have obviously been caught off guard. They once hinted that rejection of the constitution would impede further liberalization. But the surprising weight of popular opinion may give them pause - a pause that should be nourished by the Carter Administration's prudent and low-key characterization of the plebiscite as ''democratic.'' The military cannot credibly rail against Yankee meddling. The vote does, however, vindicate the Administration's periodic pleas for human rights in Uruguay. Officials in Washington, it turns out, appreciated better than those in Montevideo, the democratic aspirations of a long-silenced people."
