"Amnesty International said today that President Romeo Lucas Garcia of Guatemala directly supervises an intelligence agency that carries out political assassinations. In an extensive report on human rights violations in Guatemala, the organization said that since President Lucas Garcia took office in June 1978 nearly 5,000 people had been ''seized without warrant and killed'' by security forces and that 615 others who had been seized were missing. The Government attributes such disappearances, and some of the killings, to anti-Communist ''death squads'' engaged in fighting left-wing ''subversives.'' These squads, it says, operate outside official control. Amnesty International, a private organization devoted to calling attention to what it sees as human rights violations, challenged the Guatemalan Government's explanation, and said the evidence it had obtained showed that ''abuses attributed to 'independent' death squads are perpetrated by the regular forces of the civil and military security services.'' A Guatemalan Embassy official in Washington said comment would be withheld until a copy of the report had been received. 'Clearly Defined Program' The report said that ''secret detentions and summary executions are part of a clearly defined program of government'' that is coordinated by a specialized agency that operates in the presidential palace ''under the direct supervision of President Lucas Garcia.'' The agency, known variously as the Regional Telecommunications Center, the Regional Police, and the Presidential Special Services for Communications, is believed to be under the joint direction of the President's military chief of staff and military intelligence, the report said. It added: ''Policy decisions and the selection of who is to 'disappear' and be killed are said to be made after consultations between the top officials of the Ministries of Defense and Interior, and the Army General Staff, who command the forces responsible for the abuses.'' In 1978, a former Mayor of Guatemala City, Manuel Colom Argueta, publicly charged that the agency operated ''death squads.'' On March 23, 1979, he was assassinated in an ambush in the center of the capital. The Government has not found the killers. Terrorist Victims Listed Among the victims of political assassination named by Amnesty International are trade union leaders, teachers, university students, peasant community leaders and Roman Catholic clergymen and social workers. The report said that 27 trade union leaders arrested June 21 at the headquarters of the National Workers Confederation and 24 trade unionists arrested Aug. 24 by combined police and army forces at a rural Roman Catholic study house had disappeared. Amnesty International said the killings of political, union and community leaders revealed ''a pattern of selective and considered official action'' based on ''denunciations by neighbors, employers or local security officials.'' ''By far the majority of victims were chosen after they had become associated - or were thought to be associated -with social, religious, community or labor organizations, or after they had been in contract with organizers of national political parties,'' the report said. Miguel Angel Albizures, a labor leder representing the Guatemalan Democratic Front against Repression, said at a news conference here that since January two university professors, a journalist and a member of the executive board of the National Workers Confederation had been killed. Any resumption of United States military aid to Guatemala, he said, would ''worsen the already violent situation'' there. During his visit, the labor leader met with members of Congress, representatives of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., and State Department officials. Report Gives Transcripts The Amnesty International report contained transcripts of interviews that Amnesty International said it had obtained with an army conscript, who described the torture and killing of prisoners by the army secret service, and with a survivor of a secret prison camp who escaped and has left Guatemala. The escaped prisoner, a peasant who was held at a camp near Huehuetenango, in Guatemala's highlands, said he had seen three prisoners strangled with a rope. The conscript said he had been trained in secret service work among civilians, particularly students. In the transcript, he described the arrest and torture of a student, who he said was later killed by army intelligence agents. ''The army is a school for murders, it is as simple as that,'' said the former conscript, according to the report."
