"The Guatemalan Government has succeeded in bringing an uneasy peace to much of the countryside, where just a few months ago reports of battles with guerrillas and massacres by Government troops were commonplace. But for the largely Indian population, the convulsions of a guerrilla war have been replaced by new concerns and new disruptions of their traditional way of life. Interviews with dozens of Indian villagers, church workers, Government officials and soldiers and officers -conducted during a four-day 600-mile tour of the Guatemalan highlands -found a dramatic change. While scattered incidents of violence continue, indications are that the Government has reasserted substantial control over all but certain stretches of the border with Mexico and a handful of areas in the interior. Means Are in Dispute The means by which this control was achieved remain in dispute.  The military and the Government of Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, which took power in a coup last March, insist that the renewed support for the regime resulted from a failure by the leftist insurgents to fulfill their promises of a better way of life, combined with a new level of social concern by the Government. ''They promised them the sky and the earth but they didn't fulfill them,'' said a ranking officer at the Santa Cruz del Quiche military base. ''Instead of leaving a bad situation for a better one, they left a bad situation for something worse.'' Others, including church workers and international human rights organizations, say that the military conducted a five-month wave of terror in enough selected locations in the countryside to cause widespread intimidation of the people, thus convincing them that continued support of the leftists was hazardous to their lives. Coercion by the Guerrillas One thing on which substantial numbers of both sympathizers and opponents of the leftists have come to agree, as some trappings of peace have returned to the countryside, is that the guerrillas at least partly caused their following to drop to its present low level by forcing unwilling Indians to support their cause. ''They started out really easy with the people, paying for things, but in the end they did exactly the opposite,'' said a religious leader in Huehuetenango province. ''They forced people, they killed people for joining the civilian patrols. But to my knowledge, they never wiped out a village - at least not in Huehuetenango.'' A ranking military officer in Quiche, talking about the villagers of his province, put it this way: ''Why are there no guerrillas? Because they were the guerrillas.'' ''The guerrilla in the civil population is like a fish in water,'' he continued, paraphrasing Mao Zedong. ''You take the water from the fish, the fish dies; you take the people from the guerrillas and they die.'' Villages Are Diverse While most people here think it premature to say that the guerrilla movement is dead, a journey from Huehuetenango, the provincial capital, to this tiny northern village illustrates many of the changes that have come to the region. To get to San Mateo Ixtatan, a policeman in Huehuetenango said, pointing into the mountains, ''you take the north road and climb, climb into the clouds.'' That is just the beginning. Above the clouds, the road continues to wind on and on, a steep, rutted route that gives the impression of driving up a flight of stairs covered with fist-sized rocks. Where the road nears a village, every tillable piece of land that is not a sheer drop seems to be planted - with corn, wheat, cabbages, watermelon or other crops - making an orderly patchwork of the mountainside. The difficulty of transport has contributed to the survival of strong distinctions among the Indian population; from one village to another just a few miles away there may be a difference in dress and even in language. This physical and cultural separation makes any kind of broad organizing effort problematic. Many Checkpoints on Roads Between the provincial capital and this village, 18 civilian patrols man road checkpoints, monitoring the flow of traffic with varying degrees of vigilance. The men speak of their recent lives with varying degrees of relief and concern. From one point to another, the movement of the guerrillas' apparent retreat can be traced - from ''todo tranquilo,'' or ''all calm,'' at checkpoints near the outset, to a colorfully unprintable term meaning ''still messed up'' closer to the point where, earlier this month, leftists sledgehammered a concrete electrical tower, dropping the lines into a 4,000-foot canyon and leaving the northern half of Huehuetenango without power. The civilian patrols began under President Romeo Lucas Garcia, who was subsequently overthrown, but have been stepped up dramatically under General Rios Montt's ''rifles and beans'' program of pacification and rural aid. The Government insists the patrols are voluntary, but most of the participants believe otherwise. ''They threaten you with punishment if you don't serve - put you in prison,'' said Clemente Francisco, who was manning a checkpoint near the village of Soloma. Another problem, he said, was that manning the post - which he had done 24 times since July 1 - took time from tilling his land, ''and we have big families to take care of.'' No Gerrillas Are Sighted None of the men at the checkpoints reported having seized or even seen a guerrilla since they started patrolling with their sticks, slingshots, flintlock rifles or M-1's earlier this year, and some were beginning to have doubts, particularly since in Huehuetenango few have received any of the ''beans'' promised by the Government. ''We are fulfilling the orders of Rios Montt,'' said Fernando Joaquin. ''They say they will give us something later.'' He added that the patrols had been keeping track of the hours they served and hoped to see some reward for their efforts later in the month. Elsewhere along the route, Indian villagers, some of them women with babies in slings on their backs, can be seen among thousands of fallen pine trees. At the military's behest, they are cutting a swath 20 to 30 yards deep away from the road to remove cover that might be used for guerrilla attacks. While there are still scattered reports of military men stealing from vilagers, a change in tactics has led to a marked improvement in the relations between the Indians and the soldiers in this region.  The change is noticed and discussed by soldiers although their superiors will not acknowledge it. 'We Have Dialogues' ''Now we talk to the people, we have dialogues,'' said one of several soldiers guarding workers who were trying to erect a wooden pole to replace a shattered electrical tower. ''It's better; it's less dangerous for us. Before we harassed each other.'' Some people here see the patrols less as self-defense and more as a means of forcing the Indians to commit themselves by working against the leftists. An occasional adobe house displays a slogan scrawled in spraypainted black letters: ''Not a piece of bread or a tortilla for the guerrilla.'' And the military has taken to putting signs on some of the electrical towers it replaces, in both Spanish and Indian dialect, saying: ''We the poor of these places and villages suffer more if we don't have light from light bulbs. With candles or gas we waste a lot of money. We plead with you not to knock down this post.'' New Problems for Indians The speed with which villagers moved from insurgency to counterinsurgency has created some new problems. In some places, villagers have turned on one another. There have been several reports of Indians who originally encouraged their neighbors to support the leftists now returning, under military pressure, to point out those who ''collaborated.'' A church worker in Huehuetenango province, who had earlier seemed sympathetic to the leftists' aims, said he sees a three-stage program by the military: first, intimidate the villagers; second, control them; third, be nice to them. ''The people wanted to get free of the guerrillas; they just couldn't stand it anymore,'' he said. ''It's an awful tough thing to have two enemies out there.'' While the church worker acknowledged that the program seemed to be bringing a level of peace to the countryside, he worried about the effect on the Indian culture. ''What's happening to the Indian today when he's forced to go on civil patrol, when he's forced to do all these things?'' he asked.  ''What's going on inside of the Indian person? What's being done to the culture? You can just feel that it's hurting.'' Administration Cites Gains The present state of relative peace in the countryside has been cited by the Reagan Administration as evidence that the human rights situation here is improving under General Rios Montt -a preliminary step toward allowing Guatemala once again to receive United States military aid, which has officially been cut off since 1977 because of human rights concerns. The questions the Government here has had difficulty answering is how, after years of battling the guerrillas, calm was so quickly restored and why, if the guerrilla threat has been vanquished as President Rios Montt says, military aid is still necessary. Amnesty International, the human rights group, maintained in a report earlier this year that peace came at the price of some 2,600 Indian lives, many of them women and children, as the military systematically attempted to eliminate guerrilla leaders and instill fear in their supporters. Church sources place the figure still higher. Refugees interviewed along the border with Mexico have told harrowing stories of the destruction of their villages by Government security forces. President Rios Montt, providing answers to written questions, dismissed the charges as ''lies, falsely promoted by entities that aid subversion.'' ''I can say with total honesty,'' he asserted, ''that I have never ordered the killing of one single person, much less 2,600.'' He said the Government was winning over the people because ''there is now in Guatemala a Government that is concerned with the wellbeing of 70 percent of the people, the ethnic Indians that inhabit the major part of our territory.'' Army Rules More Blunt The army, in its written rules of engagement, is somewhat more blunt in describing its means: ''Destroy, neutralize or capture the permanent or clandestine guerrilla forces; win back the civil population that supports or tolerates whatever form of subversion; protect the population and help it in its development.'' ''Subversion,'' it adds, ''should be combated using its methods and techniques. A disinformation plan should always be in execution.'' Military officers assert that, while combating the guerrillas more aggressively in recent months, they did not intentionally kill civilians. ''Whenever there is a clash between the army and the guerrillas, some civilians are lost,'' said a military officer at Santa Cruz del Quiche. Asked how many civilians had died in this manner, he said, ''Not as many as you would imagine from reading The New York Times or The Washington Post.'' Another officer added: ''There was a period of more force, with more combats, but we were careful. I wasn't an assasssin a year ago and I'm not an assassin now. I've been doing this for 20 years.'' Diminished Need Is Noted While President Rios Montt continues to seek some military aid - aircraft parts and other items but, he says, ''nothing sophisticated or expensive'' -his field officers say the need for this type of help has diminished. ''We don't need any military help,'' a ranking officer said, ''not because we are self-sufficient but because the problem of subversion is not a military problem but a problem of economic development. We need economic help.'' While some here have taken encouragement from the military's recently increased attention toward providing aid to civilians, some concerns linger, particularly over what the Government's response would be if the guerrillas regrouped and renewed their efforts. ''The real problem is that there has not been a change in any institution before or after,'' said a church worker. ''There are people who are untouched who were the masterminds of the last regime.''"
