"When Juan Carlos Martinez Hofmann was banished this year to this isolated village in southern Chile, his punishment was underlined by the name of the community itself: Selva Oscura means dark jungle. Mr. Martinez is one of hundreds of largely insignificant political opponents of the nine-year-old regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet who have been sent into temporary exile in the distant corners of this Andean country. ''It's the loneliness that gets to me,'' he said, sitting in the pale light of his boardinghouse living room, with rain pounding outside. ''No one talks to me.'' Largely ostracized by the townspeople at the suggestion of the police, the 23-year-old Mr. Martinez represents only one of the many tales of pain and separation in this country. Thousands Are Expelled In addition to the internal exiles, tens of thousands of other Chileans, with their families, are exiled abroad, and thousands of others have passed through the jails, where torture, according to human rights leaders, is common. The sentences may be short by Soviet standards. Internal banishment lasts usually from three months to 18 months. Exiles are sent abroad for similar periods, though many are sent indefinitely. The bulk of political prisoners have been in jail for one to three years. But the personal toll is still heavy, human rights leaders say, particularly when measured against the crimes. None have been punished for terrorism, but for political acts, usually ''illicit association.'' That means joining in a political demonstration or trying to form a political party. ''It's an internal drama that destroys the family,'' Enrique Palet Claramunt, executive secretary of the Solidarity Vicariate of the Chilean Roman Catholic Church, said in an interview. ''People have a right to live freely in their own country.'' The Government defends the repression by saying the country's 11 million people need a breathing space from politics as they move toward promised democracy in the 1990's. Officials and many Chileans say they still fear the deep divisions that erupted into violence under President Salvador Allende Gossens, whom General Pinochet overthrew in a coup in 1972. 'This Is Not Russia' ''This is not Russia,'' a military officer said emphatically.  ''Ours is not a permanent situation. Maybe it's not so good, but it's better than Allende.'' But Elena Foquet, a young mother, tells of how her 5-year-old daughter ''always tries to stay behind'' with her father after their Saturday visits to him in prison each week. He was arrested last year and charged with having returned surreptiously from exile. Patricia Paredes recently returned from four years in self-exile.  She fled after her husband disappeared while in the hands of the secret police, she said. He is presumed dead. ''You're always a stranger,'' she said of exile. ''You miss your family, your culture, your whole way of life in your own country.'' Once convicted of political crimes, a person is usually prevented from obtaining government jobs and teaching positions. Those in school are normally expelled and private employers are hesitant to hire them. Fears for the Future In his solitude, the thought bothering Mr. Martinez is that he will likely be prevented from ever returning to a university in Chile. He was scheduled to graduate this month. ''All will have been lost,'' he said glumly.  Mr. Martinez was a student of Spanish at the University of Chile in Valparaiso, 70 miles west of Santiago. A slight, quiet man, he said he was arrested in October about a half-hour after an anti-Government demonstration had been held near the university. He said that he had been only a passer-by at the demonstration and that the police who arrested and beat him had planted pamphlets on him. This could not be confirmed - requests for an interview at the Interior Ministry went unmet - but Mr. Martinez said he had been present at other demonstrations and had taken part in folk-singing festivals called penas to raise funds for jailed students. Valparaiso has been a center of budding student protest. Mr. Martinez said he was interrogated by policemen who always wore hoods, apparently to protect their identities as undercover students. They had photographs of him singing at some of the penas, he said. He said he was not beaten or tortured in detention. Nor was he formally charged. But on the fifth day he was put on a train to what the police said would be three months' banishment. He was brought to Selva Oscura, some 480 miles south of Santiago. 86 Banished This Year The Vicariate reports that 86 people have been banished this year.  Some are in parched desert outposts in the north, others are in the snow-covered Andes. Selva Oscura, population 700, is an impoverished village at the end of a 20-mile dirt road in a rainy farming district of rolling hills and wild flowers. Mr. Martinez signs in at the six-man police station every morning at 8 A.M. He is restricted to the boundaries of the village; otherwise, he is on his own. He receives money from the church human rights groups to help pay for his room and board. His 77-year-old grandfather, Juan Hofmann, who said he believes in freedom of expression, has also come to keep him company. Others banished report that a key to their condition is the attitude of the local priest. The Rev. Francisco Okorend, a 56-yearold Yugoslav, has been a godsend, Mr. Martinez said, paying regular visits. Some Villagers Sympathetic ''I don't know what transgression he might have made,'' the cheery red-cheeked priest said in his accented Spanish, ''but I'm not the judge. My mission is different.'' Mr. Martinez also seemed to be winning some quiet sympathy in the village. ''He doesn't seem to be a revolutionary,'' said Sylvia Lopez, a clerk at the general store. Mr. Martinez said he continues to dislike the Government but harbors no hate. He tries instead to concentrate on his poetry, he said. ''I am learning vision,'' he said. ''I would not pretend it is such great vision as Solzhenitsyn or the great Russian exiles. But I think I am coming to feel my country more inside me now, and I want to help it ever more.''"
