"President Efrain Rios Montt told President Reagan on Saturday that he would rid Guatemala of Government death squads, a senior State Department official said today. General Rios Montt's pledge came at a meeting with Mr. Reagan in Honduras, the last stop on the President's five-day trip to South and Central America. After the meeting at a military airfield near San Pedro Sula, Honduras, General Rios Montt said he had been the target of lies since he took power after a military coup in March. In an appearance before reporters at the same time, Mr. Reagan said General Rios Montt, who has been accused by human rights groups of permitting massacres and other abuses, was ''a man of great integrity faced with a challenge from guerrillas armed and supported from those outside Guatemala.'' Moves Against Corruption The senior State Department official told reporters today that General Rios Montt had told Mr. Reagan that he was ''emphasizing winding up the death squads.'' The official, who accompanied Mr.  Reagan on visits to Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Honduras, declined to be identified at a press briefing at the State Department. He said the Guatemalan leader had told Mr. Reagan that previous Guatemalan governments had been corrupt and that he was now emphasizing policies to end corruption and move his country toward democratic institutions. On Saturday, Mr. Reagan said that General Rios Montt was committed to making progress toward democracy and that the United States ''will do what it can to support his progressive efforts.'' The State Department official said General Rios Montt had intimated that he would be in a position to hold elections for a constituent assembly in 1983. Mr. Reagan told him that he would like to see Guatemala moving toward democracy as quickly as possible and encouraged his plans to hold the elections next year. U.S. Aid Sought The official said General Rios Montt had asked for economic and military help. The United States military relationship with Guatemala was severed in 1977 when the Carter Administration cited human rights abuses there. The State Department official pulled back from statements by Mr.  Reagan that he thought the United States would resume military sales to Guatemala, and that he intended to ask Congress to continue military aid to El Salvador because of ''great progress'' there in ending human rights abuses. The official said that no decision on aid to Guatemela had been made and that Mr. Reagan's remark, made to reporters as he flew to Washington from Honduras, was misinterpreted. Decision on Salvador Awaited Mr. Reagan created a stir Friday when he said in reply to a reporter's question in Costa Rica that on the basis of his current knowledge he planned to certify to Congress that the rights situation in El Salvador warranted continued United States military aid. The State Department official said that a decision on certifying more military aid for El Salvador had not been made and that the President's remarks merely reflected a feeling of encouragement about the situation there."
