"Although there is budding political expression in Chile, now in its 10th year of military rule, widespread abuses of human rights continue, according to human rights groups and Roman Catholic Church officials. The human rights issue has recently taken on added importance because the Reagan Administration is considering lifting a 1976 embargo on arms shipments to Chile. To do so, the White House first has to certify to Congress that the Government here has made ''significant progress'' in ending abuses. Some progress is apparent to a visitor returning to the country after an absence of many months. Opposition to the Government of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, once voiced only quietly, has emerged over the last year in the press, in the music of the young, and in open conversations that can be overheard almost anywhere in this Andean country of more than 11 million people. Two Labor Leaders Exiled But with political parties still outlawed, opposition remains intimidated and low-keyed, church human rights officials say, and political criticism is directed mostly at the Government's freemarket economic policies. Those people who appear to go too far in their dissent are dealt with by the Government's secret police, who continue to torture and imprison and exile activists at roughly the same rate as in the last three years, according to human rights groups, Western diplomats and many Chileans. On Friday, for example, two labor leaders, Manuel Bustos and Hector Cuevas, were put on separate flights to undisclosed destinations abroad for having purportedly violated a law against street demonstrations. Mr. Bustos was detained at a small labor union rally here at which, witnesses said, the police severely beat several participants, most of them journalists and lawyers. ''The most grave thing in Chile today is that the abuse of human rights has become institutionalized,'' Msgr. Juan de Castro Reyes, head of the Solidarity Vicariate of the Chilean Roman Catholic Church, said in an interview. The vicariate compiles figures on human rights abuses. The police have extraordinary powers of detention and punishment under a Constitution approved in a national plebiscite two years ago. Under the charter the 67-year-old General Pinochet will remain President until at least 1989. He came to power in 1972 by overthrowing the Socialist Government of President Salvador Allende Gossens at a time of civil chaos. Murders in U.S. an Issue To end the 1976 arms embargo, Mr. Reagan must also certify that Chile has done all it can to bring to justice the assassins of a former Foreign Minister in the Allende Government, Orlando Letelier, and a young American aide, Ronni Moffitt. They were killed in 1976 by a car bomb that was detonated as they drove down a thoroughfare in Washington. Three Chilean secret police officers were indicted by a Federal grand jury in the United States for the slayings, but the Chilean Supreme Court turned down an extradition request three years ago. Mr. Reagan must also certify to Congress that it is in the interests of the United States to lift the arms embargo.  Western diplomats said that a factor likely to be favorable to Chile in any human rights certification by the Reagan Administration will be that General Pinochet has made what even his critics have applauded as a step toward healing the nation's divisions. Six weeks ago he set up a commission to study the return of Chileans in exile, estimated to number 10,000 to 35,000. The commission appears to be hurrying to make a recommendation by Christmas. The President himself, however, limited the move, saying that ''we are not opening the doors'' to everyone and that those who are invited will have to pledge allegiance to the new Constitution, a sure rub. 2,000 Unaccounted For Two categories of abuses - assassinations and disappearances - have virtually been ended since 1978, according to human rights leaders here, though there have been several mysterious deaths during arrests. Also, the 2,000 or more Chileans who reportedly disappeared while in the hands of state security forces before 1978 remain unaccounted for. Other physical abuses have fluctuated within more or less steady levels since 1979, according to the vicariate, the Chilean Human Rights Commission and Western diplomats. These are among the comparisons between last year and this year that were compiled by the vicariate, with figures that are used by the State Department: - The number of political prisoners dropped from 156 on Oct. 31 last year to 137 on that date this year. - Detentions for political reasons were up from 871 in the first 11 months of last year to 975 this year. Most of those detained were held for at least five days and some for as many as 20 days without the police having to inform anyone under the Constitution's emergency powers. - Exilings by the courts and the Interior Ministry rose from 24 in the first 10 months of last year to 25 this year. - Banishments by the courts and the Interior Ministry to internal exile in remote parts of the country dropped from 92 in the first 10 months of last year to 86 this year. The vicariate's figures are limited to confirmed cases reported to it. Many cases, particularly of detention in the provinces, are not reported to the vicariate, but Western diplomats and human rights leaders of all groups say the church figures nonetheless accurately reflect trends. Few Punished for Terrorism According to the vicariate, fewer than 1 percent of the listed punishments are for terrorism. Almost all are for violating the Government's ban on political activity under the Constitution's traditional ''state of emergency'' law, renewed every 90 days, and its newer, harsher ''state of perturbation'' provision, renewed every six months. One of the main changes this year, human rights leaders said, is that torture has become more systematic and scientific.  There are no reliable figures on torture, but human rights groups put the numbers well into the hundreds. The commission said that most people detained for political reasons this year were routinely given electric shock treatment, under the eye of a medical practitioner. The Center for National Investigation - the secret police - has also used portable electric torture machines that are plugged into a car cigarette lighter, the two human rights groups report. ''Electric diodes put on the throat prevent screaming,'' explained a young man who said that the secret police last year strapped him to an iron bed that surged with electric current. ''I prayed to die,'' was all he wanted to say of the experience.  Requests for interviews to the Interior Ministry on human rights were declined."
