"A Different Rights Dispute The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, an arm of the Organization of American States, has been agonizing this week on how to tiptoe out of a political briar patch. Barred from visiting Cuban prisons by the Castro Government, the hemispheric commission decided to hold a seminar at Harvard in March to hear from academic experts and commentators on human rights in Cuba. For reasons it has yet to explain, the panel decided that the session should be closed and that former Cuban political prisoners, whom some commission officials regarded as emotional witnesses, should not be included. These conditions did not set well with Of Human Rights, a Washington-based group that monitors political conditions in Cuba. It protested that the line-up of panelists was politically slanted in favor of the Castro Government, and it demanded that the former prisoners be allowed to tell their stories of repression and torture. In a telegram to Marco Gerardo Monroy Cabra, the commission chairman, Enrique Rueda, vice chairman of Of Human Rights, asserted, ''The panel is stacked to produce a whitewash rather than well-documented firsthand data of the human rights situation in Cuba.'' The commission, not wanting to collide publicly with anti-Castro groups, is expected to announce next week that it is scrubbing the seminar and instead will ask the panelists to submit papers on their views. New Push for 6-Year Term T hree former Cabinet officers and a brother of a former President are about to form a bipartisan committee to push for a constitutional amendment to limit a President to one six-year term. Former Attorney General Griffin B. Bell, former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, former Treasury Secretary William E. Simon and Milton Eisenhower will be in Washington Tuesday to announce the committee. The six-year term was first proposed in Congress in 1826, and since then the amendment to create it has been reintroduced more than 150 times. Its advocates over the years have ranged from Chief Justice John Marshall to Presidents Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter. Mr. Bell and the others say a six-year term would allow a President to concentrate on the broad national interest instead of the narrow political consequences of his decisions. The former Attorney General said Jimmy Carter and his White House staff were ''obsessed'' with re-election politics and sometimes attempted to interfere in Justice Department matters for political reasons. ''When Senator Kennedy and I were at odds over corporate merger policy in 1979,'' Mr. Bell wrote in his memoirs, ''Hamilton Jordan worried that my stance might offend the potential Democratic rival.'' Challenger Fights On A lthough Senator Edward M. Kennedy won re-election handily this month, a Massachusetts schoolteacher has not given up his legal battle to have the election results thrown out and force Mr. Kennedy to run again in a special election. The Supreme Court could decide as early as next week whether to hear an appeal from the high school teacher, Alwin E. Hopfmann, who contends that Democratic officials in his state acted unconstitutionally in changing the party rules to keep him from challenging Senator Kennedy in the state's Democratic primary. Mr. Hopfmann decided earlier this year to challenge Mr. Kennedy for the Democratic nomination and rounded up the 10,000 signatures required by state law for a nominating petition. Then, last May, the Democratic State Convention adopted a rule that any candidate seeking a spot on the primary ballot had to win the endorsement of at least 15 percent of the convention delegates. The rule change, Mr. Hopfmann says, effectively kept his name off the ballot and spared the Senator primary opposition. Frustrated by the slow pace of lower courts in deciding the issue, Mr. Hopfmann took his case directly to the Supreme Court. His lawyers argue that by deferring to the convention rule, election officials violated state law and the United States Constitution, which says that the places and manner of holding elections ''shall be prescribed in each state by the Legislature thereof.'' If he loses his court challenge, Mr. Hopfmann says, he will immediately file a civil suit seeking to force the State Democratic Party to pay the costs of the 1982 primary election. ''If it's their primary,'' he said, ''let them pay for it.'' Phil Gailey Lynn Rosellini"
