"When rumors of his assassination swept San Salvador in March, Juan Chacon, grinning broadly, showed up at a news conference in the Salvadoran capital to refute them. Last week, it was no rumor. Mr.  Chacon, leader of the Popular Revolutionary Bloc, a coalition of peasants, workers and students, was one of six leftist leaders kidnapped and killed in a planned assault notable - even in El Salvador -for its bloodiness. The victims had been attending an open meeting, in a Jesuit-run San Salvador high school, of the Democratic Revolutionary Front, a coalition of leftist guerrilla groups and non-Marxist dissidents formed earlier this year to oppose the country's civilian-military junta. Church officials said the meeting was stormed by gunmen in civilian clothes who dragged off two dozen people while 200 men in uniforms of the National Guard or the police stood by outside. The bodies of the leftists were found dumped outside the capital and were to be moved to San Salvador's Metropolitan Cathedral. Adding to the grisliness of the episode, a bomb was set off in front of the cathedral late Friday, injuring nine people. An ultra-right group claimed responsibility for killing the leftists, but spokesmen for the Democratic Revolutionary Front charged the Government was involved. Among the dead was the Front's president, Enrique Alvarez Cordova, who toured the United States in the summer to lobby against American support for the junta. Mr. Alvarez's mission failed, although the Carter Administration has withheld so-called ''lethal'' military aid to Salvadoran security forces in deference to charges by human rights activists of abuse.  Reversing that policy was the object of another Salvadoran mission to Washington, this one of conservative businessmen. They met last week with President-elect Reagan's advisers on Latin American affairs and said they were assured that the new administration would be more sympathetic to requests for military aid. The Salvadorans added, however, that the Reagan advisers stressed their opposition to a right-wing coup. Salvadoran rightists have reportedly been plotting to take power before Ronald Reagan is inaugurated and last week's attack was seen by some observers as a possible prelude to a coup attempt. Political violence has caused more than 8,000 deaths this year in El Salvador, a country of 4.5 million people. A meeting of the Organization of American States that ended in Washington last week expressed concern over human rights violations in El Salvador as well as in Argentina, Haiti, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay, but did not condemn the regimes or mention specific abuses."
