"State Department officials said today that the Reagan Administration was considering the sale of helicopter spare parts and communications equipment to Guatemala because the human rights situation there was improving. At the same time, a human rights group denounced the Government of Gen. Efrain Rios Montt for ''despotic and totalitarian'' practices.  The Americas Watch Committee, a New York-based human rights monitoring group that focuses on Latin America, said in a long report on Guatemala today: ''Those who are with the Government are fed; those who are not with the Government are shot. No one is permitted to remain neutral. Those who do not aid the Government - by forming civil defense patrols or by providing information on the whereabouts of guerrillas - may not be allowed to live.'' $3 Million Sale Weighed The report contrasts sharply with public and private statements by State Department officials. ''While much remains to be done,'' John Hughes, the State Department spokesman said Monday, ''we have also been encouraged by steps the Guatemalan Government has already taken to address human rights concerns.'' He said the steps had been taken in the context of Government efforts to contend with an insurgency movement ''supported from outside its borders.'' And today, Stephen W. Bosworth, deputy assistant in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, said the Administration has ''currently under consideration'' the sale of military equipment totaling $3 million. Another ranking official said that President Rios Montt had ''eliminated human rights abuses'' in Guatemala City, was working on a presidential election timetable and had begun a ''vigorous'' antiguerrilla campaign in the countryside. These are the key reasons, he said, that President Reagan had decided to meet President Rios Montt in Honduras on Dec. 4 during Mr. Reagan's trip to Latin America. Officials said that the decision on arms supplies for Guatemala was now up to President Reagan. Although the potential sale of military equipment to Guatemala is relatively small, the deal is likely to provoke strong Congressional opposition. Congress has no legal power to block the possible sale, although the House Foreign Affairs Committee says it has an ''understanding'' with the State Department under which no military aid will be given to Guatemala without the panel's approval. The State Department says it has only to consult the panel, not get its approval, for military aid to Guatemala, the most populous nation in Central America. The United States-Guatemalan military relationship was severed in 1977 when the Carter Administration cited human rights abuses there. The report by Americas Watch said that decrees promulgated by General Riios Montt, who took power after an army-backed coup in March, ''presuades us that the Guatemalan Government has overtly abandoned the rule of law and that it has overtly substituted a system of government that is both despotic and totalitarian.'' The Americas Watch mission to Guatemala was headed by Orville Schell, chairman of the group and former president of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York. Americas Watch said that a report last month by Amnesty International, the human rights organization, that 2,600 people had been massacred in Guatemala in the previous six months was ''responsible and conservative.'' But Assistant Secretary of State Thomas O. Enders, in a letter to Amnesty, took issue with the massacre report and said that guerrillas in Guatemala ''have waged a sustained and increasingly indiscriminate campaign of terror, arson, intimidation, kidnapping, mayhem, bombing and murder. ''Failure to publicize these incidents gives the public a one-sided impression of what is happening in Guatemala,'' said Mr. Enders.  ''Furthermore, it implies that human rights criteria only apply to governments and not to guerrilla groups.''"
