"Administration officials said today that the United States Ambassador to El Salvador had been told to refrain from making public criticisms of human rights abuses by Salvadoran security forces. The officials said President Reagan and ranking White House aides had concluded that ''the decibel level had risen higher than our policy has allowed in the past'' in the aftermath of the recent speech in San Salvador by the American Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton. In the speech to Salvadoran businessmen, Mr. Hinton strongly criticized the Salvadoran legal system as well as acts of violence by right-wing extremists. Mr. Hinton, a 59-year-old career diplomat who has served in San Salvador for 17 months, threatened an end to United States military aid unless human rights abuses by security forces were stopped. Although the speech was cleared by the State Department before Mr.  Hinton gave it, the White House had apparently not read the remarks beforehand. An Administration official said the speech ''took us a little by surprise.'' He said there was ''no anger'' with Mr. Hinton, but ''concern'' that the Reagan Administration wanted to avoid ''going public,'' especially while pressing for human rights and an end to rightist terrorism in El Salvador. Concern Over 'Public Rhetoric' ''The Administration's position has been that we certainly seek, as much as any Administration in the past, to be concerned about human rights,'' said the Administration official. ''But, if anything, we learned in prior administrations that high public rhetoric frequently was counterproductive.'' The official said, ''We want to continue our policy of trying to work one-on-one without going public.'' Mr. Hinton's remarks at a Chamber of Commerce luncheon in San Salvador startled many of the businessmen, who are key supporters of rightist parties in El Salvador. In the past Mr. Hinton has not only strongly supported Salvadoran Government policies, but has also outspokenly criticized opponents of those policies. To many Salvadorans, Mr. Hinton's speech was strikingly similar to the comments voiced by his predecessor, Robert White, who was Ambassador to El Salvador during the Carter Administration. Although the two men have expressed wholly different points of view about El Salvador over the last two years - Mr. White strongly opposed Reagan Administration policy - the surprise remarks by Mr. Hinton bore comparison to Mr. White's criticisms. Mr. Hinton has made it clear that his views on El Salvador remain essentially the same as they were when he arrived. What is different, however, is his decision - apparently with the acquiescence of the State Department but not the White House - to ''go public'' and say openly what he voiced privately to Government officials over the last year. Officials in Washington as well as in San Salvador have made it clear that the Hinton speech did not mark a shift in United States policy toward El Salvador, but reflected growing frustration by the United States Embassy at the inability of the Salvadoran legal system to convict right-wing terrorists. What especially angered American officials, including Mr. Hinton, was the decision in October by two Salvadoran judges to exonerate, in effect, a politically well-connected army officer accused of killing two American land redistribution workers and the head of El Salvador's land program two years ago. Mr. Hinton, in his remarks, suggested that continuance of United States military aid was at stake unless El Salvador ''makes progress in bringing the murderers of our citizens to justice'' and controls abuses by security forces. An Administration official said that the comment threatening an end to military aid ''simply had not been cleared by the White House.'' The Administration official emphasized that there was ''no anger'' toward Mr. Hinton, who has been a well-liked figure within the Reagan White House and in the State Department. The official added that ''some concern'' was voiced by President Reagan, who read about the speech after it was given and apparently felt it was too strong. In San Salvador, a United States Embassy spokesman, Don Hamilton, said rumors that Mr. Hinton was planning to resign were ''a bunch of baloney.'' Mr. Hamilton said that the Ambassador's speech was ''within the guidelines of U.S. policy as he understood them.'' In recent days, Mr. Hinton as well as White House spokesmen have said that the speech was ''cleared'' by the State Department. But, Administration officials indicated, the speech had not been read at the White House before it was given on Oct. 29. Some Administration aides indicated that the objections to the speech had less to do with its content - criticizing human rights abuses and rightist death squads - than with its candid language. Mr. Hinton said that the rightist ''mafia'' in El Salvador was as much a threat to the nation's stability as leftist guerrillas. One official said: ''There are obvious risks in public diplomacy.  The question is whether you accomplish more by going public or delivering your message privately.'' Other officials said that Mr.  Hinton, and many embassy aides, had grown increasingly frustrated by their inability to exert leverage over the Salvadoran Government. Leftists Are Charged in Salvador SAN SALVADOR, Nov. 9 (Reuters) - A Salvadoran military tribunal today formally charged eight left-wing political and labor leaders with having directed ''terrorist activities.'' The eight were among 15 opposition leaders abducted at gunpoint last month, a few days after the five guerrilla groups of the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front formally proposed unconditional talks to end the three-year civil war. The abductions were seen here as an attempt to disrupt the move toward negotiations."
