"Nearly 1,000 unidentified bodies have been discovered in six cemeteries over the last few weeks. The discovery has heightened public suspicions that the military, despite its denials, was responsible for the fate of 6,000 people who disappeared during a leftist insurgency in the 1970's. A judge has already noted that the register at one cemetery gives ''military confrontation'' or a similar reason as the cause of death of 31 people from among 156 unidentified bodies. Human rights leaders are now seeking court orders to have all the bodies exhumed for identification. The military has promised to turn power over to an elected civilian government by March 1984. But President Reynaldo Bignone cast doubt on the timetable when he announced recently that an accord with civilian leaders on the conduct of the military during the insurgency was being sought. Military Fears Investigation The President said that the agreement was not a condition for a return to democracy, but many civilian leaders said that appeared to be the clear message. The military is known to fear an investigation by a future civilian government. Some political leaders have already joined labor, church and human rights leaders in calling for a full accounting by the military of its role in the thousands of deaths as well as disappearances. Failure to resolve the issue could block a promised return to civilian rule. Maj. Gen. Llamil Reston, the Interior Minister, said recently that the cases of those who had disappeared must be discussed, in the context of the transition to democracy, as an ''obstacle'' to be overcome. A month ago the Government banned all reporting on the subject of the disappearances by television and state-owned radio. Rights Situation Improves The issue has arisen at a time when human rights here have greatly improved. The disappearances and flagrant torture all but stopped two years ago and the Government has been steadily releasing political prisoners. Some 316 are now being held without formal charges under a seven-year-old state-of-siege law, one-third the number of a year ago, and General Reston said the rest would be released by the end of next year. There is also greater freedom of the press to discuss the issue. Many Argentines who once accepted the military's repressive tactics as necessary to fight the leftist terrorism have changed their minds as evidence is emerging that many of the victims of that repression died because of mistakes, corruption and political opportunism. The new willingness to confront the Government has begun to appear when the military rulers have been weakened by Argentina's defeat by Britain in the war for the Falkland Islands. Furthermore, the army is split internally and a group of colonels are among those suspected by political leaders for distributing a document to news organizations recently rejecting elections as untimely. The document was signed the ''Clandestine Junta of Commanders in Chief.'' Many civilian leaders fear that hard-line elements in the army might overthrow the Bignone Government in order to silence the criticism over human rights. Promised Accounting Is Delayed Political and human rights leaders have called for the end of the state of siege, which was imposed before the military took power in a coup more than six years ago. But the Government has said the law is still necessary because exiled subversives may return. There has been no terrorism here for several years. The Government is six months late, however, on a promised accounting of those who disappeared. One Interior Ministry official cited problems over paper work, but said not to expect any startling disclosures anyway. Some politicians are of two minds on whether to press for investigations. Many appear to be groping for a compromise so as not to have to face the issue should they take office. ''What I lose sleep over,'' said Deolindo Bittel, a Peronist party candidate for President, ''is how are we going to end the hate - end the persecution and the deaths - that could bring us a civil war.'' Disclosures in the Press Revelations about a number of cases have appeared in the press since a former Treasury Minister under the military, Juan Alemann, charged two months ago that two former Argentine diplomats did not appear to have been the victims of terrorists, as the military maintained. In one of the two cases, the family of Elena Holmberg, a former official in the Argentine Embassy in Paris, had a court investigation reopened and publicly stated that she had been submitting reports to her superiors about corruption in the navy when she was killed here in 1979. A former diplomat, Gregorio Dupont, a friend of Miss Holmberg's, said she had told him she was about to report that the Commander in Chief of the navy, Adm. Emilio E. Massera, had met secretly in Paris in 1978 with Mario Firmenich, head of the leftist Montonero guerrillas, and paid him $1 million. He said he did not know the reason for the payment. Mr. Dupont's brother, Marcelo, a 46-year old advertising executive unrelated to the case, disappeared four weeks ago and was found dead nine days later with a broken skull. He had been tortured with electric prods, according to a coroner's report. Brother Accuses Admiral No one has taken responsibility for the death. The surviving brother has blamed the now retired admiral, and has been locked in a public quarrel with police officials who said the dead brother inexplicably traveled to neighboring Uruguay and Brazil during the time he was unaccounted for. Admiral Massera, who is now running for President, has denied the charges against him. He has attributed the murder to unknown groups trying to smear him. Human rights and political leaders suspect that one of the many murky extreme right-wing groups who in the past have had connections to military intelligence might have been responsible. They also suspect these groups of being responsible for the anonymous death threats that more than a half-dozen Argentine journalists pursuing human rights issues have reported receiving in recent weeks. But the upshot of the Dupont death, after a brief tremor of fear that shook the country, is that criticism of the military over human rights, far from diminishing, is growing. Angel F. Robledo, a Peronist leader, has called for Government inquiry, saying the matter must be resolved ''no matter the consequences.''"
