"The United States Ambassador to El Salvador, describing the Salvadoran legal system as ''rotten,'' has threatened an end to military aid unless human rights ''abuses'' by the security forces here are stopped. ''You can't have a democratic society unless you have a rule of law,'' the Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton, said in an interview last night. ''We have been bothered, terribly bothered, by the failure of this judicial system to work.'' Mr. Hinton's comments, which were far stronger than his previous statements on the political situation here, were part of a blunt and angry exchange in recent days between him and Salvadoran businessmen and rightists over the waves of murders and other violence by rightwing extremists. Issue Flares Suddenly Although American officials in San Salvador and Washington have privately expressed concern about human rights abuses here, the issue suddenly flared into the open on Friday with an unusually candid speech by Mr. Hinton. The Ambassador told about 450 businessmen that the rightist ''mafia'' that kidnapped and murdered political opponents here posed as much of a threat to El Salvador as leftist guerrillas. The speech startled many of the businessmen - members of the American Chamber of Commerce - and about a dozen of them walked out. The Chamber of Commerce, which represents some of the most powerful business interests in El Salvador, attacked Mr. Hinton today in a full-page advertisement in a morning newspaper, El Diario de Hoy. 'A Slap in the Face' The group said Mr. Hinton's speech had been ''a slap in the wounded and bloodied face of our country.'' It said Mr. Hinton, who has usually played a highly sympathetic role toward the Salvadoran Government, had ''cast aside the diplomatic and ethical norms of his mission.'' Mr. Hinton's speech stirred interest for two reasons. It is highly unusual for an American ambassador to make a public and candid criticism of the nation in which he serves. Moreover, Mr. Hinton's address plainly reflected what appeared to be a new hard line toward the Salvadoran Government by the Reagan Administration. Mr. Hinton said in the interview that his remarks had been approved by the State Department and had been ''clearly within my understanding of Washington's thinking.'' He said that the Salvadoran legal system was ''rotten,'' and that ''we have been bothered, terribly bothered, by the failure of the judicial system'' to prosecute murderers. He added, in response to a question, that United States military aid was ''threatened.'' The United States Embassy says the Reagan Administration has requested $61.3 million in military aid next year for El Salvador.  The aid is conditional on the President's certification to Congress in January that El Salvador has made progress in improving human rights. ''There's time for improvement and progress,'' Mr. Hinton said.  ''That's one reason you change the tactics a bit and go public.'' In his speech, which was generally received in stunned silence by the luncheon audience, Mr. Hinton said that in the first two weeks of the month 68 people were murdered ''under circumstances which are familiar to everyone here.'' Daily Disappearances Reported ''Every day we receive new reports of disappearances under tragic circumstances,'' he said.  Mr. Hinton, a 59-year-old career diplomat who has served here for 17 months, said, ''American citizens in El Salvador have been among the murdered, among the disappeared.'' ''Is it any wonder that much of the world is predisposed to believe the worst of a system which almost never brings to justice either those who perpetuate these acts or those who order them?'' he said. Mr. Hinton, who spoke in Spanish, added: ''The mafia must be stopped. Your survival depends on it. The gorillas of this mafia, every bit as much as the guerrillas in Morazan and Chalatenango, are destroying El Salvador.'' Morazan and Chalatenango are regions in which leftist forces have been involved in especially heavy fighting with Government troops. U.S. Anxious Over Death Squads Behind the dispute is American anxiety, if not bewilderment, at the activities of rightist murder and kidnapping squads, some of them linked to security forces. American officials are expressing worry for the first time that the Reagan Administration may find it difficult in January to certify that El Salvador is making progress in human rights. Under restrictions imposed by Congress for continuing military aid, the Administration must certify every six months that progress is being made in improving the human rights situation here. Calling the criminal justice system here a virtual failure, Mr.  Hinton said in his speech that since 1979 ''as many as 30,000 Salvadorans have been murdered, not killed in battle, murdered.'' There have been fewer than 200 convictions for these and other major crimes, he said. In perhaps the most pointed public threat about United States aid to El Salvador by an American diplomat, Mr. Hinton said, ''I try to communicate as clearly and honestly as I can the sentiment of the American people, the Congress and the Administration. 'The Message Is Simple' ''The message is simple,'' he said. ''El Salvador must make progress in bringing the murderers of our citizens, including those who ordered the murders, to justice; in advancing human rights, and in controlling the abuses of some elements of the security forces. ''If not, the United States, in spite of our interests, in spite of our commitment to the struggle against Communism, could be forced to deny assistance to El Salvador,'' he said."
