"To the Editor: Your Oct. 12 news article ''Guatemalans Tell of Murder of 300'' painted a gruesome picture: members of the Guatemalan Army entered an Indian village and indiscriminately murdered civilians. his incident needs to be seen in a political context. The capacity of the Guatemalan military to continue these atrocities depends to a large extent on economic and military favors from its friendly northern neighbor, the U.S. Government. In 1977, after President Carter criticized the Guatemalan Government for excessive violation of human rights, the offended officials refused to accept any more military aid from the U.S. By 1981, Guatemala humbly received $3.1 million worth of military transport material. Now, there are signs that the Reagan Administration might reopen the flow of military and economic aid to Guatemala, which, according to Amnesty International, has murdered at least 2,600 civilians since Efrain Rios Montt took power in late March. Already, an $11 million development loan has been granted, as part of the Caribbean Basin Initiative, and last week the State Department announced that it would not block the $170 million of loan requests under consideration by the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank. Up for immediate consideration is a loan for $18 million for a telephone system in a war-ravaged rural area.  Next year, Guatemala hopes to receive $15 million in economic aid and $3.5 million in military aid, pending Congressional approval.  Though these loans are not called ''military aid,'' the Guatemalan military does stand to benefit: Government funds that might have gone elsewhere can now go to the military, and the improved infrastructure - i.e., communications - will help the military to do its wanton job more effectively. The Reagan Administration, eager perhaps to send more aid to a ''friendly'' Central American government without appearing completely unscrupulous - and without appearing to break the (often broken) U.S. law prohibiting loans to consistent violators of human rights - is making the outrageous claim that the human rights situation in Guatemala has improved. Are we protecting the citizens of Guatemala from the ''Red Menace'' emanating from Nicaragua? Were we protecting the citizens of Nicaragua from the same menace last year when we denied them a promised $6 million worth of wheat? Do we ever hear of such inhuman acts on the part of the Government of Nicaragua as the massacre the Oct. 12 article described? It seems that the U.S. Government and the international banks are helping the Guatemalan Government make a choice for the Guatemalan Indians: ''Better dead than Red.'' NINA ELIASOPH Hadley, Mass., Oct. 19, 1982"
