"The Reagan Administration, disturbed about the disappearance of Salvadoran opposition figures last week, has dispatched a high official to San Salvador to press home to the authorities there that the United States will end military aid unless the human rights situation improves. The official, Under Secretary of Defense Fred C. Ikle, left for El Salvador Monday night. He is scheduled to meet the Defense Minister, Gen. Jose Guillermo Garcia, and other senior Salvadoran officials after he arrives Wednesday to inform them that the Reagan Administration will meet strong - possibly overwhelming - Congressional opposition to further military aid because of two recent events in San Salvador. One of these is the seizure of about 15 leftists and labor leaders by heavily armed men in civilian dress last week. Under strong pressure from the United States Embassy to find out the whererabouts of the victims, the Defense Ministry in San Salvador said today that eight were in the custody of the armed forces and would be tried as terrorists. But the fate of the seven others remains unclear. Strong Reaction Expected The other issue is the recent failure of two Salvadoran judges to take action against a politically well-connected military officer who had been linked to the killing of two American land reform specialists and a Salvadoran official at the Sheraton Hotel in San Salvador in January 1981. Meanwhile, in Mexico City, El Salvador's guerrilla-led opposition announced that it had proposed negotiations without conditions with the Salvadoran Government aimed at ending the country's civil war.  Initial reactions from San Salvador were said to be negative.(Page A8.) Administration officials said Mr. Ikle is expected to make it plain to Salvadoran officials that Congress, once it resumes session late in November, is expected to react strongly to the two cases. 'Lot of Pressure' Noted Beyond this, Administration officials said, President Reagan is scheduled to certify in January that El Salvador has made progress in human rights and economic and political improvements. Such a step, which must take place every six months as a condition for continued military aid to El Salvador, will meet powerful Congressional opposition if the issues are unresolved. One informed Congressional aide said today that ''a lot of pressure'' was being bought to bear on Defense Minister Garcia, who is responsible for all security forces. The aide said that the United States had informed the Salvadoran Government that the recent kidnappings posed ''critical'' difficulties for Administration efforts to prove that human rights were improving. On the killings of the two American land-program consultants, Michael Hammer and Mark Pearlman, and the Salvadoran head of the redistribution program, Rodolfo Viera, one Administration official said it was ''difficult and vexing'' to attempt to justify the failure of the Salvadoran judicial system to try the two politically connected suspects. ''I don't know how to deal with this in the context of certification,'' the official said. ''The issue is a very serious one for us. What do we do about it?'' 'Crucial Symbolic Issue' Two Salvadoran judges have ruled that there is insufficient evidence against one of the suspects, Lieut. Isidro Lopez Sibrian, although investigations and testimony have linked him to the killings. Another officer implicated in the case, who was attached to the Salvadoran Embassy in Costa Rica, has disappeared in Guatemala.  A State Department official said that the case, which has stirred special interest here because the two Americans worked for the A.F.L.-C.I.O., had turned into a ''crucial symbolic issue.'' ''We have told the Salvadorans time and time again how crucial this case is for the Americans,'' the official said. ''What you're seeing now is another example of why that judicial system has collapsed.  There's a widely held suspicion that the judges involved have had their families threatened with death.'' The official said that Administration officials had in recent weeks pressed General Garcia, as well as President Magana, to resolve the murder case. But the official added, ''If the night before a decision, someone tells a judge that we know your children and they're dead at noon if you act against a defendant, then no degree of commitment by Magana and Garcia will eliminate the threat.'' ''The question is whether the investigation and court case will continue despite the threats,'' the official said. Military Holding 8 Men SAN SALVADOR, Oct. 26 (AP) -The Salvadoran military has announced it is holding on terrorism charges eight leftist and labor leaders who disappeared last week. Seven others are still missing. ''All are held in a military corps waiting military trial for their participation and organization, and for being leaders of terrorist delinquent groups which have brought pain to the Salvadoran family,'' said a bulletin issued late Monday by the Defense Ministry's press office. The bulletin said all eight had participated in guerrilla groups - five Salvadoran groups are linked as the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front - or in ''political support groups'' of the front. The eight were accused of involvement in the guerrilla campaign of economic sabotage in the three-year-old battle against the United States-supported Government."
