"A bomb exploded today in San Salvador's Metropolitan Cathedral, where the bodies of five slain leftist leaders were lying. The right-wing group blamed for the killings was said to take responsibility for the explosion. The force of the blast ripped out the front of the church and sent the caskets of the leftists flying through the cathedral. The body of one of the le ftists was badly mutilated by the explosion, witnesses said. Five people were seriously injured by the bomb, which was planted in a car outside the cathedral, according to the witnesses. The bomb set fire to the cathederal and at least a dozen businesses surrounding the church. A male caller told a San Salvador radio station that the bombing was the work of the Maximiliano Hernandez Brigade, a rightist ''death squad'' named after a Salvadoran President who killed 30,000 peasants to put down the 1932 uprising. A similar caller said yesterday that the brigade was responsible for the killings of the leftists. Fears of Leftist Reprisals The kidnapping of seven leftist leaders yesterday and the slaying of five of them raised fears of leftist reprisals.  The ruling junta, facing rightist and leftist terrorism, said today that the situation was ''very delicate and could get worse.'' It later put the nation's 22,000-member armed forces on alert. Leftist militants set off two small bombs and burned a bus today in downtown San Salvador in the only response so far to the killings. Right-wing terrorists killed five peasants in Sonsonate, 46 miles west of the capital. The five slain leftists were among 20 to 24 people who were abducted at gunpoint from a Jesuit-run high school three blocks from the United States Embassy by a band of nearly 200 men who raided the school. Junta Issues Appeal The United States-backed ruling junta, besieged by leftist guerrillas and rightist paramilitary groups, urged in a statement today that the kidnapping victims' human rights be respected. Salvadoran rightists, whose two previous coup attempts against the jun ta were thwarted by the Carter Administrat ion, believe that President-elect Ronald Reagan will not stand in their way. Meanwhile, the armed forces announced that a Cessna-310 plane loaded with weapons and ammunition presumably meant for leftist guerrillas had crash-landed near Santa Teresa, 43 miles south of the capital. The two crewmen set fire to the craft and escaped in another small plane that was accompanying them, an armed forces spokesman said. He said the Cessna was registered to Exaco, a Costa Rican company, but a partner of the company said that the plane was sold last week. Seven of those who were kidnapped at the high school yesterday were top leaders in the Democratic Revolutionary Front, a coalition of 18 leftist organizations. Five bodies were found late yesterday and early today. Two other kidnapped leaders of the front were still missing and a third leader, initially reported taken in the raid, was said to be in hiding."
