"Leftist guerrillas continued to hold about 80 business and Government leaders hostage here today as more details of their demands became known. The hostages include most of Honduras's major economic figures, including the Ministers of the Economy and the Treasury and the president of the Central Bank. One hostage, a businessman, escaped this morning from the rear of the Chamber of Commerce building, where they have been held since Friday evening. The guerrillas released four more hostages this evening. On Saturday night, the guerrillas freed 14 hostages, then threatened to begin killing the rest if their demands were not met. A deadline set for later Saturday night passed without incident. A communique from the Cinchoneros Popular Liberation Movement, one of four leftist guerrilla groups operating here, took responsibility for the action and said it had been taken to combat the ''hunger, poor health, illiteracy, lack of housing and rights to culture, art and science, lack of respect for public and individual rights and the hold of terror and repression of the state.'' The Cinchoneros, named for a 19th-century peasant leader, are believed to have some ties to the Farabundo Marti Liberation Front, one of the major guerrilla groups opposing the Government of El Salvador. The Group's Demands The group listed eight demands, including the release of 70 to 80 political prisoners, mostly Hondurans and Salvadorans. The Government denied at a news conference today that it was holding any political prisoners. It said it was also unable to provide any information on the whereabouts of Alejandro Montenegro, a Salvadoran guerrilla leader whose release is being sought by the Farabundo Marti Liberation Front. Other demands of the Honduran guerrillas were the repeal of a broad antiterrorist law enacted this year; the expulsion of American and other foreign military advisers from the country, and an end to the ''intervention of the army against the Salvadoran people.'' They also demanded the expulsion of troops opposing Nicaragua's Sandinist Government, which they said were operating here ''with the help of the Honduran Army''; the withdrawal of Honduras from the Central American Democratic Community; the conversion of ''millions of dollars of imperialist military assistance'' to aid for peasants and workers, and an end to the ''repression'' of the Honduran people."
