"AU-PRINCE, Haiti, Aug. 28 -A jury reinstated today the conviction of the head of Haiti's Christian Democratic Party and 21 of his associates on charges that they committed anti-Government acts in 1980 The official, Silvio Claude, and the other defendants were sentenced to six years in prison.  The sentence was a reduction from an earlier punishment of 15 years at hard labor, which was overturned by Haiti's high court last March. But it was more severe than international human rights officials here had expected. The case had been viewed as a test of the Government of Jean-Claude Duvalier's current position on human rights and political freedom. International human rights representatives who attended the 21-hour trial at the Palace of Justice here said that procedural rules had been followed to the letter, but that the content of the trial made it ''a farce.'' ''There was no evidence against most of the defendants and no credible evidence against the remainder,'' said Bruce J. Ennis, a representative of the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights and Americas Watch, two human rights monitoring groups. Outcome Never in Doubt ''It was obviously a show trial, and the outcome was never in doubt,'' he said. Mr. Ennis said he expected his organization to ask Congress to cut off United States aid to Haiti - now about $38 million a year - until the human rights situation here improves. The 22 defendants were charged with conspiring to set fires in an effort to overthrow the Government, and Mr. Claude and his daughter, Marie, were charged additionally with violations of Haiti's press laws involving insulting the President and with plotting an illegal public demonstration. The press law charge stemmed from the publication in the Christian Democratic Party magazine, Conviction, of a series of photographs of prominent dictators along with one of President Duvalier, with a caption that read, ''How Long?'' The demonstration charge involved a request to the Government by Mr. Claude's daughter for permission to hold a demonstration protesting his arrest and jailing in September 1980. The permission was not granted, and no demonstration was held. Observers said the defendants had been allowed to address the court freely, and to ask whatever questions they wanted of the four witnesses presented by the Government. But the witnesses were not compelled to answer, the observers said, and seldom did. Evidence Called Contradictory In addition, the observers said, the evidence presented was sometimes contradictory and occasionally conflicted with the public chronology of the events that had taken place. They said the trial had often erupted into shouting matches between the defense and prosecution attorneys. The defense called no independent witnesses. ''It was worse than anybody expected,'' said Michael S. Hooper, director of the Haiti project for the Lawyers Committee.  Mr. Claude's group, although tiny, was among the last political opposition organizations remaining in Haiti. He and his associates were arrested in the fall of 1980 in a sweep of journalists, political figures and human rights activists following a spate of bad publicity for the Duvalier Government. Like many others arrested, Mr. Claude was offered a chance to leave the country rather than face a prison term. But unlike many others, he refused. The nearly two years he and the others have already spent in jail will be credited against the six-year prison terms."
