"The commander of United States military forces in Latin America believes it is ''imperative'' for the United States to resume military assistance to Guatemala to help combat a threat posed by leftist guerrillas. Lieut. Gen. Wallace H. Nutting, who heads the 10,000-member United States Southern Command based in Panama, said in a recent interview that the United States should play ''essentially the same role'' in Guatemala as it is now doing in El Salvador, where equipment and training are being provided for the local armed forces. He also argued that the situation in Guatemala was potentially more serious than in El Salvador. ''The population is larger, the economy is stronger, the geographical position is more critically located in a strategic sense,'' he said. ''The implications of a Marxist takeover in Guatemala are a lot more serious than in El Salvador.'' Aid Was Renounced in 1977 Guatemala renounced United States military aid in 1977 to protest a critical human rights report prepared by the Carter Administration.  Subsequent Guatemalan requests for a resumption of military assistance were then blocked by members of Congress concerned about continuing human rights violations by the Government of Maj. Gen.  Romeo Lucas Garcia. Since a coup brought Gen. Efrain Rios Montt to power in March, however, the Reagan Administration has been urging key Congressmen to lift their objections to helping the Guatemalan Army. Those efforts have been largely unsuccessful so far, and a delegation of Congressional aides that visited Guatemala recently concluded that the rural population was still suffering widespread repression as a result of the regime's counterinsurgency campaign. Referring indirectly to concerns about human rights violations in Guatemala, General Nutting said that ''there must be an acceptable political situation'' before American military aid can resume. But he added: ''I think that it's unfortunate up to this point that those responsible for making that judgment have felt that kind of political situation did not exist.'' 'The Guerrilla Will Persist' The general expressed particular frustration that the Congress was not strongly ''motivated'' to act.  ''Congress does not appreciate the historic importance of the competition in Central America,'' he added. ''Therefore the will is not apparent in the United States to take those steps necessary to assure an agreeable outcome in Central America. And until understanding and will increase, the guerrilla will persist.'' The general, who has traveled extensively through Latin America, insisted that El Salvador was part of a broader regional problem, of which Guatemala is ''a more serious part that we have not yet faced.'' He said he had not visited Guatemala since the March coup because ''I certainly don't want to build expectations that can't be fulfilled.'' ''I believe that no single government in Central America is capable of sustaining itself against the present assault,'' he went on. ''They've got to have outside support because outside support is being funneled to the opposition and they cannot cope with the problem alone. It's not a problem for each individual country to face.'' A Prospect of 'Finlandization' In a wide-ranging conversation, General Nutting repeatedly returned to the theme that events in Central America should be seen in the context of the projection of the Soviet Union's global power. He also raised the prospect that, without United States military help in the region, Cuba's and Nicaragua's military strength could result in the ''Finlandization'' of the isthmus."
