"The Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, Thomas O. Enders, ended a two-day visit to El Salvador today. Mr. Enders, who arrived Saturday, met with a ''wide range'' of Salvadoran leaders, according to a United States Embassy spokesman here. The spokesman, Don Hamilton, said Mr. Enders's mission was ''obviously related to certification.'' In order to continue military aid to El Salvador, budgeted at $61 million next year, President Reagan is required by law to certify every six months that the Salvadoran Government is making substantial progress in the area of human rights and in carrying out the country's land redistribution program. President Reagan is expected to make that certification later this week. Mr. Enders is scheduled to testify Thursday before a House committee and on Aug. 3 before a Senate committee. A State Department spokesman in Washington said today that the primary purpose of Mr. Enders's visit was to prepare him for those Congressional appearances. Mr. Enders was particularly interested in what plans the Salvadoran Government has for putting the land redistribution program into effect, according to the spokesman. Mr. Enders was the second high-level State Department official to visit El Salvador recently. Last week, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, Elliott Abrams, was here for two days. Torture in Salvador Condemned Special to the New York Times WASHINGTON, July 26 - The State Department today condemned the use of torture in El Salvador and said ''one of the main goals'' of United States policy was to eliminate such practices there. Dean Fischer, the State Department spokesman, made the comment in response to an article in today's issue of The Washington Post that cited reports of police torture against civilians in El Salvador. The report came as the State Department was preparing to certify to Congress later this week that El Salvador is making progress in human rights and its land redistribution programs. Mr. Fischer, in his statement, said the United States Government ''condemns the use of torture under any circumstances.'' ''Any such incident as that described in the article is absolutely inexcusable,'' he said.  ''There have been instances of torture,'' he added, ''and in each instance that has come to our attention we have made the strongest of representations to the Government of El Salvador registering our objections. While human rights abuses such as this have not disappeared, there have been steps taken within the Government and the national police to eliminate such practices. We will continue to support these efforts strongly as one of the main goals of our El Salvador policy.''"
