"President Reagan is expected to certify to Congress this week that El Salvador is reducing human rights violations and making advances in land reforms, a Congressional requirement for continued United States aid. Elliott Abrams, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, who visited El Salvador last week, discussed his findings with Bernard Weinraub of The New York Times Washington Bureau. Excerpts from their conversation at the State Department follow. Question. Has there been actual progress? Answer. There's been progress on land reform. There was certainly an attack on the program but we think that the counterattack has succeeded and that the program is moving ahead, the land-to-thetiller program. Progress on human rights is much harder to measure. By our measurements, which rely on the Salvadoran press, and by the measurements of virtually every other Salvadoran source including the Central American University, which is sympathetic to the left, the general trend of violence is down. There is a beginning in the last six months of punishment of military officers and enlisted men who commit human rights offenses -and policemen. That's a very important sign that you can't do this stuff anymore. Progress has been slower than we would like and the human rights situation continues to be bad. But Congress wisely asked, 'Is it moving in the right direction?' The answer is yes. Q. Has a lid been placed on the security forces in terms of wanton killings, lack of discipline? A. Yes. Again, I do not suggest that we have very good data, but it's clear that there's been a decline. The real problem is professionalism and the command and control structure. An example - the National Guard has little posts of 15 men in almost every town (with) no communication, no radio, no telephone and no transportation. They patrol by going out and walking 10 miles in one direction and coming back. The next day, they walk in another direction. That helps explain why it's so hard for the high command to maintain control and insist on standards of behavior. One way you deal with it is professional military training, which we've done; one way is with communications equipment, of which we have given some and are giving more, and one way is to get a commitment from the high command to punish wrongdoing. We've seen more of that in the last six months. As near as one can make out, there is less gratuitous violence against civilians. The Guerrilla Link I said to the head of the National Police - let's talk about human rights violations. The first thing he did was pull down a looseleaf book filled with the pictures and biographies of young National Police officers who were killed by guerrillas. He said, 'Aren't those human rights violations?' When guerrilla activity goes up, government military activity goes up. Inasmuch as the guerrillas frequently hide behind civilians and travel with civilians, civilian casualties go up too. Q. How concerned are we about human rights violations, the killing of Indians, in Guatemala? A. We have been very concerned. Under the previous Government, we did not provide military assistance because of the human rights record. The situation is improved under President (Efrain) Rios Montt, especially in Guatemala City. (Formerly) a phenomenal number of people would be killed, including Christian Democrats and other political leaders. That is completely stoppped. It means political life can begin again. It's been more difficult to control human rights abuses (by) the military. As I indicated with respect to El Salvador, these are not army units that have a tradition of respecting human rights. And that may be the understatement of the year. subhed somewhere Q. What are the basic differences between the Reagan and Carter Administrations on rights? A. The Carter Administration believed that public criticism was more effective than we do. In countries where we have good friendly relations and a lot of influence, we use that influence first. We have recourse to public criticism only when those private efforts have failed. Another difference may be more fundamental. I would say the human rights situation has declined drastically in what used to be South Vietnam and Iran. In the South Vietnamese Government and under the Shah, you had real and serious human rights problems, but the replacement regime is much worse. We try to ask, 'Who is the likely alternative and what is that likely to mean?' We don't just ask 'Are you doing bad things and should we therefore stop dealing with you?' (Former Assistant Secretary of State) Pat Derian says, 'Who knows what the future is going to bring to Iran or South Vietnam or South Korea? You act on what you know is the case at a given moment.' That's wildly wrong because it produces Vietnams and it produces Irans. It would produce another such situation in El Salvador. Q. Critics say the Administration is not concerned with rights in South Africa or Argentina. A. False. I understand the difficulty that we are in and why we have credibility problems. (In) a country which is friendly - South Korea, Argentina, South Africa - we have a lot of influence. The first thing we try to do is to use that influence. Last week I called in, with a regional assistant secretary (of state), the ambassador from one of those friendly, right-wing countries to make a very strong protest about a human rights situation. We've done a lot of that and we have seen some benefits. But the public doesn't see it. Q. You have seen advances? A. Yes. One has to remember that in most countries, friendly, unfriendly, the influence of any outsider is marginal on a central political and social question. Frequently good things happen and we can't really take credit. There was an election in the Dominican Republic, in Honduras, in El Salvador, in St. Lucia. That didn't happen because we said it should. (But) there are a good number of cases where people are out of jail now, or never have gone in because of what we did. Or where torture has been substantially reduced or an election was held or the results were honored because of American influence."
