"A Guatemalan opposition group urged the Reagan Administration today to halt aid to the new military junta in Guatemala because of what it termed the ''terror and violence'' against Indians and peasants. However, State Department officials responded that urban violence in Guatemala had declined for the first time in years in the aftermath of the coup by young military officers two months ago In addition, State Department officials said, the new Government has pledged to end human rights abuses and corruption. The charges against the junta were made at a news conference here by officials of the Guatemalan Patriotic Unity Committee, an exile group of labor leaders, farmers, businessmen and journalists. Carlos Gallardo Flores, vice president of the group and a former Social Democratic Party representative in the Guatemalan Congress, conceded that the junta had allowed a degree of press freedom but said many of the proposed changes, which the United States has welcomed, were ''cosmetic.'' ''There is no intent to make real social change in Guatemala,'' said Mr. Gallardo Flores, who lives in exile in Costa Rica. ''Two percent of the population has 80 percent of the gross national product. One percent of the population owns 60 percent of the arable land. The terror and the violence are continuing.'' Murder of Relatives Charged Another exile, Rigoberta Menchu, an Indian, who said several members of her family had been murdered by troops loyal to the former regime of President Romeo Lucas Garcia, said that ''nothing has changed'' since General Lucas Garcia was ousted March 24. ''The massacres have continued,'' she said. ''The coup d'etat is really a continuation of what was.'' Later, Miss Menchu met State Department officials to urge an end to American aid to Guatamala.  United States development and food aid to Guatemala this year totaled $11.7 million; next year, the figure is expected to climb to $13 million. American officials acknowledge that the reputation of the former regime had been blotted by the many political killings in Guatemala City and by corruption. But the new junta, led by Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, has so far pleased the Reagan Administation."
