"The support given Argentina on the Falkland Islands issue by a broad spectrum of Latin American political opinion is sowing confusion and controversy among some American and European human rights groups and liberal-left political organizations. While a number of leaders of human rights organizations said in interviews that it was too soon to predict what the long-range effects would be for the international human rights movement, they remarked that the present paradoxical situation had caught North Americans and Europeans off guard. There is astonishment that former allies in a campaign against human rights abuses in Argentina and against the involvement of Argentina on the side of antileftist forces in Central America should be backing the Argentine military Government on its claim of sovereignty over the Falklands. Among Argentina's supporters are some Latin American human rights activists who were themselves the subjects of Argentine persecution. Argentina's position is also supported by Venezuela, Cuba and Nicaragua, Salvadoran guerrillas and opposition figures in Argentina itself. There is concern that the Falkland issue might drive a wedge between North and South American human rights workers, who have forged new alliances over Central America. Loss of Support Feared There is also apprehension that human rights groups based in Britain and Northern Europe will lose influence and support in Latin America because of Britain's military action. ''This does affect our work; there is no doubt about it,'' said Larry Cox, a spokesman for Amnesty International. ''The fact that we are British-based does matter. We can do very little but continue to stress that we have no position on the dispute.'' ''This is not an issue of democracy versus dictatorship for us in Latin America,'' said Juan Fereira, director of the Washington office of the Latin American Human Rights Association, a liberal organization based in Quito, Ecuador. ''For us it is an issue of colonialism versus Latin American sovereignty. ''There was a serious misperception of this in both the United States and Europe,'' Mr. Fereira, a Uruguayan critic of Argentine human rights abuses, said. ''But I think the Europeans are now beginning to understand their mistake.'' He said the French were being advised to back off from strong support of Britain, which was losing rather than garnering friends among liberal and leftist Latin American governments. Nicaragua has been particularly outspoken in support of Argentina.  In an interview with an Argentine news service in Washington late last month, Nicaragua's Foreign Minister, Miguel d'Escoto Brockman, said that ''mere verbal solidarity'' with Argentina was not enough, and that ''we will be willing to go much further should the need arise.'' U.S. Seen as Target Administration officials regard the Nicaraguan position as little more than an attempt to embarrass and isolate the United States in Latin America. However, among some liberal and left-of-center pressure groups opposed to Administration policy there has been unhappiness and confusion, according to several organization officials. A result has been silence on the part of many organizations searching for a policy acceptable to both Latin American and North American opinion. Almost alone in its clear and consistent criticism of Argentina has been the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a liberalleft policy group supported largely by labor unions. Michael Luhan, a regional specialist on the southernmost Latin American nations for the council, wrote in the May 4 issue of the organization's Washington Report on the Hemisphere, ''The call to rally round, in the name of principle, the flag of one of the least principled governments in Latin America, is indeed questionable.'' Among developments that have followed the Argentine seizure of the islands, which all Latin Americans call the Malvinas, was some relaxation of persecution of Argentine opposition figures, according to Mr. Fereira and Juan Mendez, the Argentine-born director of the Washington office of Americas Watch, an organization that monitors human rights in the hemisphere. ''Exiles are returning to Argentina in interesting numbers because they feel the need to be there as this crisis is developing,'' Mr.  Mendez said. According to Mr. Fereira, Ricardo Obregon Cano, one of the most prominent Argentine supporters of the Montonero guerrilla rebellion, which was brutally crushed by Argentina in the late 1970's, plans to go back to the country next week from exile in Mexico."
