"El Salvador seems particularly stricken by the virus of violence.  Even in Latin America's most notorious dictatorships, an implicit immunity normally protects the best known clerical and civilian opposition leaders. But not in El Salvador, where an estimated 8,000 people have already been killed this year. The Roman Catholic Archbishop, Oscar Romero, an internationally known defender of human rights, was slain last spring. Now the country confronts the murder of five or more top opposition leaders, including the head of the leftist Democratic Revolutionary Front. Official accounts of the killings blame ''death squads'' of the ultra-right, allegedly acting without Government knowledge.  Opposition and diplomatic sources dispute this claim. But even if the official explanation holds up, it is depressingly symptomatic of the present Government's failings. For nearly a year, the operation of these ''death squads'' has severely compromised whatever chance once existed for rallying support for Government-sponsored reforms. It is especially painful that these outrages have occurred under an avowedly reformist Government strongly supported by the Carter Administration. Some of its leaders are surely committed to land redistribution and broader public participation in politics. But these reformers have steadily lost ground to military junta members who advocate repression. Ronald Rea-gan's earlier misgivin gs about American iden tification with reform in El Salvador seem already to be irrelevant . By January, there may be nothing left of that experiment wi th reform to support. The opposition leaders who were killed this week had thrown in their lot with armed guerrillas resisting the junta, but they were not themselves guerrillas. In fact, the most prominent of them, Enrique Alvarez, was a certified member of the country's long dominant economic oligarchy. A millionaire cattle rancher, he had served in previous governments, both before and after the reformists took over last year. He had concluded that the military had to be swept from power before the necessary changes could occur - a conclusion that was shared by Mexico's ruling party and the main social democratic parties of Western Europe. El Salvador's Government now faces another severe challenge to its credibility. An appropriate initial response would be an energetic, impartial investigation of the latest murders, perhaps with the participation of the Organization of American States. Only a reliable investigation and convincing punishment of the killers might still permit a meaningful national reconciliation. But even that seems a vain hope. The most likely prospect is further slippage into the deadly whirlpool of a civil war."
