"Civil libertarians who filed a civil suit seeking to free 2,200 Haitians from Federal detention had their say in court on Friday. In closing arguments, they characterized the detention policy as ''arbitrary, capricious and an abuse of discretion.'' In a two-month Federal District Court trial, the Government argued that the policy was a realistic step toward regaining control of the nation's borders. The summations of Department of Justice attorneys will be heard Tuesday. Then the case will go to Judge Eugene Spellman, who expects to take two weeks to make his decision. He has said that ''certainly this court has not had a more complex, more difficult matter presented to it'' in his time on the bench. Policy Adopted as a Deterrent Most of the Haitians have been detained since last summer, when the Government stopped ''sponsoring'' them out to church groups, relatives and individuals. The detention policy, Government witnesses have said, was adopted to deter other aliens who might enter without documents. But the plaintiffs argued that the policy discriminated against the Haitians. ''The Poles get released,'' Ira Kurzban, one of the Haitians' attorneys, said. ''The Haitians get detained.'' He also said that testimony had shown that Nicaraguans, among other nationalities, are routinely released into the community while Haitians are held. The Government's contention is that the Haitians, unlike Poles and Nicaraguans, are not political refugees. In the view of the Federal Immigration and Naturalization Service, the Haitians are fleeing economic repression, which is not a ground for asylum here. Concern for Duvalier Civil libertarians describe this as a way of muting a sensitive foreign policy issue. The Governments of Nicaragua and Poland are not allied with the United States, they point out, while the regime of President for Life Jean-Claude Duvalier of Haiti is. The assertion is that the United States is overlooking repression in Haiti in order to keep the friendship of President Duvalier. It could hardly risk insulting him, the Haitians' lawyers contend, by granting his countrymen political asylum. The Haitians are being held at Federal facilities in five states and Puerto Rico. About 600 are at the Krome Avenue Detention Facility, a former missile base 25 miles west of here. Physicians at Krome Avenue have reported a large number of cases of mental depression among the Haitians, though no figures were made public.  Five Haitians have attempted suicide at the facility in the last two months. Krome is a treeless camp on the edge of the Everglades. Scarcely a week passes without a demonstration outside its gates on behalf of the detainees. The immigration service has been generous with visitors' passes recently, particularly to civil rights activists and other concerned citizens. Most visits end with a news conference outside the gate, with the visitors describing what they consider appalling conditions. Grand Jury Condemns Camp This week, a Dade County grand jury issued a 56-page report calling for the Haitians' release. It described Krome as ''nothing more than a detention camp,'' and called the Federal policy ''discriminatory and racist.'' Art Brill, a Justice Department spokesman, responded by saying that the Haitians have chosen to stay in detention rather than return to Haiti. Last month, Attorney General William French Smith said here that the Haitians ''can leave voluntarily any time they want to - all they have to do is go home.'' In court Friday, Bruce Winick, another lawyer representing the Haitians, said that the Government has made his clients ''whipping boys'' to deter illegal entries by other aliens. In his summation of the Haitians' suit, Mr. Kurzban said, ''We ask the court to release the Haitians and to restore their dignity - and this country's dignity and honor.'' ''The defendants have had a vendetta against the Haitians,'' he added. ''That's the only word I know to describe it.''"
