"The torture of prisoners such as has been ''routinely practiced'' in some Latin American countries has been ''effectively eliminated'' in Nicaragua, according to a report on human rights in Nicaragua by the Americas Watch Committee. The report, issued at a news conference in New York yesterday by the private human rights organization, took issue with a contrary finding on Nicaragua by the Reagan Administration in February. The Watch report, while citing inadequate prison facilities and ''harsh'' interrogation practices in Nicaragua, said the State Department's finding of ''credible reports'' of torture there was ''not substantiated'' by the available evidence. In only one area of investigation, freedom of the press, did the Watch report make an unqualified negative finding on Nicaragua. End to Censorship Urged The report's authors, two lawyers who visited Nicaragua for 10 days at the beginning of March, urged that the leftist Sandinist Government end censorship and sanctions against critical publications. The lawyers, both members of the Watch Committee, are Stephen L.  Kass, a partner in a New York law firm, and Juan E. Mendez, an Argentine, who is director of the committee's office in Washington. ''We think there is a very strong potential for a deterioration in the human rights situation,'' Mr. Mendez said of Nicaragua. ''The elements are also there for improvements.'' The other major area investigated by the lawyers was the recent forced relocation of about 8,500 Miskito Indians away from the troubled Rio Coco region on the border with Honduras. The report, which devoted 37 of its 87 pages to the Miskitos, handled this complex issue gingerly. Besides the relocated Indians, more than 10,000 other Miskitos have taken refuge in Honduras after clashes with Nicaraguan forces. Mr. Kass said the Miskitos' plight would be eased if the United States and Honduras would ''cease to supply assistance to those who have carried out raids'' across the border into Nicaragua. But the report also criticized abuses, possibly including ''some summary executions,'' in the relocation and resettlement of the Miskitos in camps. The report held that in general ''disappearances'' and ''illegal executions'' of political dissidents or others were isolated incidents and not condoned by Managua. But, it said, the status of as many as 30 people who have disappeared since last year ''has not been satisfactorily explained by the Government.'' The same was true, it said, of 17 persons who were ''executed without trial'' last year."
