"The United States has agreed for the first time to let an international body examine conditions at two camps where Haitians are being detained, in Florida and in Puerto Rico. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, an arm of the Organization of American States, asked for permission to inspect Fort Allen, P.R., and the Krome North camp near Miami after receiving complaints of human rights violations at the two centers. The State Department and the Immigration and Naturalization Service denied that any of the Haitians' rights had been violated but agreed to let the group examine the conditions in which they were being held. Verne Jervis, a spokesman for the immigration service, said today that there were 555 Haitians at Krome North and 771 at Fort Allen, the site of an old Army base and Navy communications center. Hearings 'Stymied by Litigation' ''We detain all aliens pending exclusion hearings,'' Mr. Jervis said. ''Hearings on the Haitians have been stymied by litigation.'' The original complaint was filed in 1979 by the International Human Rights Law Group, a nonprofit public interest law firm, on behalf of the National Council of Churches and 8,000 Haitians seeking refuge in the United States. The basic charge, said Amy Young-Anawaty, executive director of the law group, is that ''innocent people are being detained in unlawful, inhumane conditions and should be released.'' The United States initially opposed any investigation by the O.A.S. commission, on the ground that the Haitians were litigating the same issues in Federal courts and had not exhausted the remedies there. However, when the commission decided to visit the camps, United States authorities said last week that they would do all they could to help the official observers. Formal Report May Follow Normally after such a visit, the commission prepares a formal report with recommendations and submits it to the General Assembly of the O.A.S., which can then pass a resolution urging a country to improve human rights conditions. Immigration officials said physical conditions at the Krome center, which has permanent buildings, were somewhat better than at Fort Allen, where the Haitians live in tents set up on a wooden platform. David Carliner, an immigration lawyer who is chairman of the International Human Rights Law Group, said he hoped that the O.A.S.  investigation would ''sensitize the United States Government to the international implications'' of detaining the Haitians. Federal authorities are holding a total of 2,025 Haitians at 14 sites. Reagan Administration officials said that the detention of Haitians arriving in Florida and the interception of boats suspected of carrying illegal immigrants had sharply decreased the flow of Haitians in the last year. The officials said President Reagan's policy was designed to prevent a mass migration of aliens like the one in 1980, when 125,000 Cubans fled to the United States. Extension Sought for Fort Allen The Government's agreement with Puerto Rico to use Fort Allen as a detention center expires in August. Michael J. Henke, a Washington attorney for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, said the United States was negotiating to extend the agreement for a year. An extension would require approval from the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston, which issued an order limiting the use of Fort Allen in certain ways designed to protect public health and the environment. The First Circuit includes Puerto Rico. Although the O.A.S. commission asked the United States to refrain from deporting Haitians while it studied their complaint, the Government has proceeded with deportation hearings and some deportations. ''The Haitians are being detained because they choose to stay,'' Mr. Jervis said. ''They are free to return to Haiti at any time.''"
