"The United States has decided to end a four-year freeze on arms sales to Guatemala after signs that a coup last month improved human rights conditions, according to Administration officials. The officials said that as a gesture to the month-old Government of Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, the United States planned to approve the sale of $4 million worth of spare parts for American-made helicopters being used by the Guatemalan Army against leftist rebels. The United States is also hoping to revive $50,000 in military training funds for the current fiscal year and to resume support for loans to Guatemala in the Inter-American Development Bank and other international financial institutions. It had already requested $250,000 in training funds for the 1983 fiscal year. Interest in Arms Questioned Congressional sources said the new Guatemalan Government had not requested a resumption of arms deliveries and seemed more interested in construction equipment such as bulldozers to be used by engineering battalions. There is opposition in Congress among liberal members who feel that the Administration is moving too quickly to embrace the new Government. ''We really don't have enough information to measure whether things are better temporarily or permanently,'' a Congressional aide said.  It is unclear whether Congress is in a position to slow any rapprochement with Guatemala. Representative Michael D. Barnes, chairman of a House subcommittee on inter-American affairs, said there was an ''informal agreement'' with the Administration that Congress could exercise ''what amounts to a veto'' over any change in policy toward Guatemala. An Adminis-tration official said there was an understanding to consult with Congress. Mr. Barnes, who is a Maryland Democrat, said he hoped to take a look at the situation before deciding whether to support the resumption of assistance. Congressional sources said the United States seemed determined to reward the new Guatemalan junta for moving against both corruption and indiscriminate violence since seizing power on March 23. The sources said that, over the last 15 months, the Administration had on several occasions indicated its desire to aid the Guatemalan Army in its struggle against the rural insurgents, but was unable to act because of opposition from both Congress and public opinion. However, Thomas O. Enders, Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, contended this week that the United States had given the previous Guatemalan regime of Gen. Romeo Lucas Garcia the cold shoulder. ''In Guatemala we carefully refrained from backing a regime with a record of serious human rights violations,'' Mr. Enders told a House subcommittee. ''Otherwise we might never have had a government that proposed to do something about it.'' Violence has existed intermittently in Guatemala for three decades, but the situation deteriorated after General Lucas took office in July 1978. Moderate politicians were murdered or forced into exile by rightist hit squads while thousands of Indian peasants were killed by the army in a strategy aimed at destroying the rebels' political base. Guatemala Renounced Aid in '78 After the Carter Administration criticized Guatemala's human rights performance, the Guatemalan Government renounced American military assistance in 1978. When Ronald Reagan assumed office, Guatemalan conservatives were confident of a rapprochement. But the Reagan Administration found that rights violations continued to be an obstacle to closer ties and, last summer, it urged General Lucas to temper repression by the army and to sponsor a civilian candidate for the elections last month. As an encouragement, The United States permitted a commercial sale of $3.2 million worth of jeeps and vehicles to the Guatemalan Army. These efforts brought few results. Not only did repression continue, but General Lucas named his Minister of Defense, Gen.  Anibal Guevara, as the Government's presidential candidate. After General Guevara was declared the victor in the elections and three competing civilian candidates charged fraud, speculation over a possible coup began. The United States nevertheless recognized General Guevara's victory when a letter from President Reagan was delivered to General Lucas three days before his ouster. Since then, a three-man junta headed by Gen. Rios Montt has announced moves to dismantle paramilitary murder gangs and to bring to trial ousted officials believed responsible for corruption. No date for new elections nor any social or economic program has been announced, although General Rios Montt has called on the rebels to lay down their arms on the ground that the motive for the insurgency had been eliminated by his coup."
