"BUENOS AIRES ARGENTINA has seen thousands of disappearances and assassinations since the military took power six years ago, but the reaction to the latest case was extraordinary. The disappearance and murder a few weeks ago of Ana Maria Martinez, a young pregnant woman and former member of a leftist party, was protested by mainstream civic, political and labor leaders, newspapers, magazines and ordinary citizens - as well as the human rights groups, whose vigil had been lonely. ''The tragic death of Ana Maria Martinez,'' a group of respected attorneys said, ''is a flag that represents the wounds of thousands of unexplained disappearances that suffocate the country.'' The outspokenness reflects growing willingness to criticize the military. Union street demonstrations last week were the largest and most violent in six years. Hundreds of people were reportedly detained and at least 10 were injured by police bullets, rubber bullets and tear gas. Largely economically motivated, the labor unrest had been evolving over recent months, adding weight to citizens' demands for an accounting of the more than 6,000 missing Argentines and presenting the military with a ticklish challenge. 'Classic' Right-Wing Operation The Interior Minister, Gen. Alfredo St. Jean, promised last month to release such an accounting, a change from the military's previous insistence that the missing were casualties of war and should be forgotten as presumably dead. And two weeks ago, the military Government announced the release of 80 political prisoners, made possible, it said then, by improvement in the security situation. Miss Martinez was kidnapped a half-block from her home in a poor working class suburb 20 miles from Buenos Aires. She was forced at gunpoint into a Ford Falcon that had been seen cruising the neighborhood. She was found dead two weeks later, half-buried in a muddy river delta. Human rights leaders said the murder was a classic operation by right-wing groups, close to or part of the security forces. Foreigners in Western countries have long been angry about human rights abuses in Argentina, but Argentines had remained notably silent. Many of them feared retribution; still more had mixed feellings of acquiesence and support. The national consensus six years ago held that drastic measures were needed to combat leftist terrorism that claimed almost 700 lives before the military took over. Today, the climate of terror has ended. Miss Martinez was the first political assassination victim recorded this year. Last year, human rights groups listed one assassination and one disappearance.  Press censorship has eased. Knowledge of abuses has spread. Many Argentines privately concede that the military overreacted. There is no groundswell of demands to prosecute them, but many want an accounting. Most of the missing presumably were killed in torture chambers, pushed from airplanes or succumbed to other grisly fates described by survivors. But their mothers and relatives continue to hope some may be alive. The new alliance of forces was dramatized when burly union men from the Light and Power Workers joined mothers of the missing in their weekly march around the Plaza de Mayo, in front of the presidential offices, on the fifth anniversary of the disappearance of Oscar Smith, the union's secretary general. The men demanded ''an immediate, full investigation.'' Mr. Smith had opposed the military politically, but was not allied with guerrillas or their supporters. At a memorial mass for him, with leaders of the outlawed General Confederation of Labor present, there were shouts of ''Let the missing reappear alive.'' The Roman Catholic Church in Argentina, possibly the most conservative on the continent, was mute during the worst years. But four months ago, the Conference of Bishops issued a statement lamenting ''the anguishing situation of the families of the disappeared.'' Bishops have been speaking out. ''How can it be,'' asked Bishop Miguel Hesayn of Neuquen, in a recent Sunday homily, ''that the moral crisis that the entire country is now talking about has reached a point where the torture of mothers and fathers hearts has been practically institutionalized?'' An Admiral Speaks Up Five main political parties have also called for an accounting.  Political leaders believe that unless the issue is resolved before they return to power, they will be caught between popular pressure and military stonewalling. Many in the military fear that an accounting will lead to an Argentine version of the Nuremburg trials. But General St. Jean has denied reports that the military is considering a ban on future probes into their actions. Fissures have developed in the armed forces. Retired Admiral Eduardo Emilio Massera, a member of the junta at the time of the coup, called publicly for release of a list of people the military knows to be dead. In punishment, the navy jailed the admiral for 10 days. This infuriated the army, which demanded a longer sentence. The Government has tried to defuse the furor over the Martinez case, asserting it is pressing ahead with the investigation.  Interior Ministry officials at first blamed extreme leftists seeking to discredit the Government. But later, two leading newspapers, citing unnamed military sources, said extreme rightists killed the woman. That the newspapers reported these stories at all was a sign of the change that has come to Argentina."
