"President Reagan is preparing to send Congress a certification on human rights that would enable the Administration to restore military aid to the regime of Gen. Augusto Pinochet Ugarte of Chile. Like Mr. Reagan's previous certification, on El Salvador - denounced by Representative Jonathan B. Bingham as ''a fraud, pure and simple'' -the certification on Chile would run contrary to all available evidence and further strain the Administration's credibility. The Administration is expected to gloss over the military dictatorship's continuing violations of human rights. This is no surprise. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. made it clear from the beginning that, as an Administration priority, human rights considerations would be subordinated to combating international terrorism. But Mr. Reagan apparently is determined to ignore the Pinochet regime's terrorist activities as well. He would also certify, as the law requires, that Chile is not ''aiding and abetting'' international terrorism and has taken ''appropriate steps'' to bring to justice three Chilean Army officers indicted by a United States grand jury for an act of terrorism in Washington, D.C., in September 1976: the placing of a bomb in a car that killed Orlando Letelier, the former Chilean Ambassador to the United States, and an American, Ronni K. Moffitt. (At the time, both were working for the Institute for Policy Studies.) The Pinochet regime's abysmal human rights record prompted Congress to cut off military aid in 1976. Amnesty International and other rights organizations dispute the Administration's contention that the human rights situation has significantly improved in Chile. Amnesty argues: ''Citizens suspected of nonviolent opposition to the present authorities still risk sudden death, torture, imprisonment or banishment to remote areas.'' The state-sponsored terrorism has extended beyond Chilean borders: The regime also has actively abetted international terrorism. A Federal district court found it legally responsible for the two murders in Washington - 14 blocks from the White House. The Federal Bureau of Investigation asserted that Chile was ''the center of Operation Condor'' - a network of South American intelligence agencies that cooperated in assassination missions against political opponents around the world. The Chilean secret police, formerly known as DINA, were linked to the 1974 murder of a Chilean general and his wife in exile in Argentina, and the 1975 machine-gun attack on the founder of the Chilean Christian Democratic Party, Bernardo Leighton, and his wife, Anna, in Rome. Moreover, recently obtained letters written by the convicted assassin in the Letelier-Moffitt case, Michael Townley, suggest that General Pinochet himself met with Italian terrorists who carrried out the attack on Mr. Leighton at DINA's request. The letters contain many references to Chile's connection with other well-known terrorists and terrorist organizations. The Administration will be hard-pressed to find evidence that Chile's past ties with international terrorists have been completely severed. But certification that the Pinochet regime has cooperated in bringing to justice the three former DINA officials for their participation in the murders of Mr. Letelier and Mrs. Moffitt will be the most difficult for Mr. Reagan to make honestly. The three, including the former DINA director, Manuel Contreras, are free men in Chile. United States investigators were told by a high-ranking Chilean general that Mr. Contreras had admitted: ''We did it, but nobody is going to be able to prove it. So what?'' Yet, despite this admission, the regime has refused to take any steps to seriously investigate their roles in the assassinations and bring them to trial. According to Lawrence E. Barcella, the United States prosecutor in charge of the Letelier-Moffitt investigation, the Chilean authorities ''haven't done spit since the day this thing happened. In fact, they have been dilatory and obstructionist.'' The Pinochet regime's failure to investigate the assassinations, its involvement in a vast international terrorist network, and its continuing violations of human rights have prompted 47 Congressmen to urge the Administration not to certify Chile. Their letter to Mr.  Haig says that the regime has not made significant progress on human rights, and that certification of progress in the Letelier-Moffitt murders ''would be false.'' It concludes: ''Any military assistance or sales to the Government of Chile are a clear violation of the law, and providing certification at this time would subvert the letter and intent'' of Congressional legislation on restoring aid to Chile. The Administration would do well to heed their advice and not perpetrate another fraud, pure and simple. --------------------------------------------------------------------- Peter R. Kornbluh is a research associate at the Institute for Policy Studies, a research organization."
