"At the recent opening here of ''Missing,'' a movie about the 1973 military coup in Chile, a diminutive, darkhaired woman talked quietly but earnestly with Sissy Spacek, the actress who portrays the wife of an American who disappeared in the takeover. ''At the very same time you were searching in the film for your husband, I was looking in real life for my husband,'' the woman told Miss Spacek, recalling the confusion that followed the overthrow of the Socialist government of Salvador Allende Gossens by the rightwing forces of Gen. Augusto Pinochet. The woman is Isabel Letelier, the widow of Orlando Letelier, an Allende Cabinet member and outspoken Pinochet critic who was jailed in the early hours of the coup. He was subsequently released but was assassinated in a car-bombing three years later while living here in exile, purportedly by secret agents of the Pinochet Government. Mr. Letelier was widely known in Washington for his urbanity and charm. He worked with the Inter-American Development Bank and served as Chile's Ambassador to the United States before being summoned home to join the Allende Cabinet. 'I've Lived So Many Lives' In the years her husband worked at the bank, Mrs. Letelier, now 49 years old, made many friends in Washington as she took care of their four sons, taught Spanish at Georgetown University, worked as a sculptor and helped organize an art gallery. ''I've lived so many lives in Washington,'' she said. Since her husband's death, Mrs. Letelier has taken over his role as a Pinochet critic.  ''For me this is not a short-term commitment,'' she said recently, sitting in an office cluttered with posters, plaques, photographs and pamphlets, all relating to human rights. She spends much of her time lecturing around this country and is head of the Human Rights Project at the Institute for Policy Studies, a liberal study group, where her husband was working at the time of his death. She also heads the Chile Committee for Human Rights, a group she organized to compile information on human rights violations. The Reagan Administration's de-emphasis of the human rights issue as a foreign policy tool has disheartened Mrs. Letelier, especially the Administration's ''certification'' to Congress that El Salvador had made sufficient progress in human rights to qualify for aid. She wonders whether Chile be certified next? Extradition Refused ''I really can't believe certifiction of Chile is going to happen,'' said Mrs. Letelier, pointing out that the Chilean Government had refused the United States request for extradition of three senior secret policy officials who were indicted in her husband's death. Michael V. Townley, a United States citizen who allegedly worked with Chile's secret police, is serving a prison term of from 3 1/2 to 10 years in connection with the bombing, which also took the life of Ronni Moffitt, a Letelier associate. Three other persons who were convincted have had their sentences overturned on appeal. Around her neck, Mrs. Letelier wears a black volcanic pebble bearing the impression of a sea gull. It was carved for her by Mr.  Letelier in his year of imprisonment on frigid Dawson Island, 600 miles north of the Antarctic Circle, and it reminds her of him and of her native land. For the moment, Mrs. Letelier and her children are unable to return to Chile, where they have relatives and friends, because the Pinochet Government has declared them persona non grata. But she remains optimistic about her life and the future. ''When you develop negative feelings, you become something very dark,'' she mused. ''I do believe strongly in a better society.  Without being a romantic, I know that each of us can do something.''"
