"At a press conference in Buenos Aires the other day, David Rockefeller, chairman of the Chase Manhattan Bank, praised the Argentine military government for having ''stabilized'' the country. Life in Argentina, he said, was ''much better than before.'' In Argentina and other countries on a Latin American tour, Mr.  Rockefeller signaled a change in U.S. human rights policy. He told a group of Argentine Government and business leaders that Presidentelec t Reagan ''will deal with the world as it is. He is not going to try to change the world in his own image.'' Reading reports of those remarks, I thought about Jacobo Timerman, who was Argentina's leading newspaper editor until he was kidnapped by an army unit, tortured, imprisoned, held under house arrest and finally expelled. No charges were ever brought, but the reasons for his brutal treatment were clear enough: he had spoken out for human rights, and he was a Jew. Jacobo Timerman was in New York recently, on a visit from his new home in Israel, and he spoke quietly about what had happened to him.  He remembered the first three questions put to him when the interrogation started: ''Are you a Jew?'' ''Are you a Zionist?'' ''Is your newspaper Zionist?'' He answered yes to all three questions - the last falsely, because his newspaper was not ''Zionist,'' but Timerman thinks the answers saved his life. His interrogators had told him he was going to be killed. Instead, they thought they could use him in a show trial to prove the existence of a worldwide Jewish conspiracy. In time, protests from the outside world led Argentine authorities to release him. The Argentine Government is one of the few in the world today that includes elements of unmistakably, unashamedly fascist character.  They have not only used violence and murder to force conformity with extreme right-wing views; they are openly anti-Semitic. Many who survived time in jails and interrogation centers report seeing the swastika on display. Right-wing repression in Argentina followed years of left-wing terrorism. The terrorists carried out political assassinations and kidnappings on a scale that traumatized the country. Outsiders do not always appreciate that Argentine society came near to crumbling under that assault. But the violence by agents of the state in the last four years has been condemned by international bodies as going beyond any justified response. More than 7,000 Argentinians, among them children, have been taken away from their homes and have simply disappeared. A recent report to the Organization of American States said Argentine Government tactics amounted to ''state terrorism.'' Widespread torture has been documented. Among its victims was Adolfo Perez Esquivel, the Argentine sculptor who was just awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his activities on behalf of human rights. When he won the prize, Perez Esquivel said his work for human rights was ''very simple. We do not go outside the law. We only ask that if a person breaks a law, that he be judged by a court, that if a person disappears, they tell where he is.'' After ignoring the prize for some time, the Argentine Government said that, whatever his intentions, Perez Esquivel had helped terrorists. All this makes one wonder why David Rockefeller chose to go to Argentina at this time and say the things he did. For the effect could only be to lend legitimacy to a system that allows the use of bestial methods for political ends. Mr. Rockefeller told the meeting of Argentine businessmen and Government officials: ''I don't think anyone in this room opposes the promotion of the application of human rights.'' But he said he hoped that President-elect Reagan, ''while in no sense abandoning the objectives, will pursue a different approach'' - one based on U.S.  national interests, such as trade and natural resources. His listeners had no doubt of his meaning. A New York Times correspondent, Edward Schumacher, wrote that they and others who met Mr. Rockefeller in nearby countries heard what they wanted to hear: that the election of Mr. Reagan will likely lead to a lessening of human rights restrictions on them. President Carter's human rights policy, with all its imperfections, has saved lives and helped to relax repression in some places, such as Brazil. It is not the only way to advance American ideas of human decency. But if Washington is going to try new policies in the field, surely prominent individual Americans should avo id gestures ofaccommodation with evil. David Rockefeller has the burden of living with lunatic conspiracy theories - about his bank, his family, the Trilateral Commission. But he is a man of unusual prominence, whose example matters. The next time he considers such a gesture to Argentina, he might think of something said by Jacobo Timerman - said of Argentines, but applicable to all of us: ''It is very easy to hate a Nazi, a guardian in the Gulag. But the real danger is not them. It is the decent people who compromise with evil.''"
