"Guerrillas and villagers in San Vicente Province say that Government security forces murdered a total of 124 people in this Salvadoran hamlet and two nearby hamlets in January, but the charges could not be verified on a visit to El Campanario today. Facts were hard to ascertain here, and there was evidence only of tragedy: 14 human skulls, bloodstained clothes, including a little girl's yellow dress, and several female scalps with thick black hair, one still adorned with an ornamental comb. A United States Embassy spokesman said that an investigation into the reported massacre began this morning in response to the charges made by people living in the area and publicized over the weekend by a church-related human rights organization. The spokesman said that all serious charges of human rights violations are investigated by the embassy, which is required to report such violations to the State Department. Area Under Rebel Control According to the guerrillas and the villagers who are friendly to the insurgents, the victims were killed here and in the nearby hamlets of San Benito and Pita Puente on or around Jan. 25. Because this area is under the control of armed insurgents, reporters who go into it to look for proof of the charges can do so only with the permission of, and escorted by, guerrillas. El Campanario, about 50 miles southeast of San Salvador, was reached by driving along several miles of dirt and grass-track road through rebel-held areas off El Salvador's coastal east-west highway and then by hiking a mile or two over rocky footpaths on scrubcovered, sunburned hills. A guerrilla who identified himself only as Ephraim led two American reporters and two photographers into El Campanario this afternoon. The group was allowed to visit the site only after convincing the armed rebels who guarded the approach to the hamlet that the journalists represented publications with wide influence. There was much to see, but there were also many unseen factors and many unanswered questions.  Ephraim took the reporters and photographers to a hilltop clearing surrounded by a scattering of abandoned farmsteads and small brickand-adobe houses with tiled roofs. At the entrance to a small compound, marked off with fences and tall cactus plants, there was an open pit, with several bones and a skull at the bottom. Below that, Ephraim said, about 50 or 55 bodies had been buried. There was no way of verifying the account. The largest building in the clearing was a structure described by a small, and apparently freshly painted, sign as a Pentecostal church.  According to the guerrilla guide, the Salvadoran military men who invaded the area - members, he said, of the Government's one-year-old crack Atlacatl battalion - had pulled people from the church and lined them up along a barbed-wire fence at the back of the building, where all were beheaded. The attack here, Ephraim said, was supposed to have taken place on Jan. 25, a Monday. He indicated that the people had fled into the church for safety. The guerrillas said that about 75 people had died here - those pulled from the church and others from homes in the hamlet. He said 35 had been killed at Pita Puente and 14 at San Benito.  There was no way to confirm those figures with local civil authorities since the land is in rebel hands. The guerrilla said that a man who escaped the attack had told the rebels that about 30 soldiers had been responsible. He said they used machetes to kill the local people because the weapons were silent. He said that gunfire would have sounded a general alarm to the rebels. Tomas Escobar, a 56-year-old peasant from nearby Las Lombras, and one of the few people seen along the hike into the reported massacre site, said that he thought that about 60 military men had been involved in the attack. When asked what uniforms they wore, he said ''all of them - the national police, the army, the national guard and some in civilian clothes.'' He said that there seemed to be no motive for the reported killings. Reporters Invited to Briefings The guerrilla said that insurgent forces who found the bodies at the end of January informed Radio Venceremos, the rebel station, of the discovery. He did not say what use the rebel radio had made of the report. The reported murders were not brought to the attention of the press in the capital until this weekend, when the church-related human rights organization, which has offices in the compound of the Archdiocese of San Salvador, invited reporters to informal press briefings on Friday and Saturday. Today some reporters visiting the site found the evidence inconclusive. According to statistics compiled by the Center for Documentation and Information at the University of Central America in San Salvador, also known as the Catholic University, 13,229 civilians were slain in 1981, compared with 9,826 in 1980. The Human Rights Commission of El Salvador, a nonprofit organization that was founded in 1978 at the urging of some of the country's Christian Democrats, says that 16,276 were killed last year, a 20 percent increase over 1980. And the church-related human rights organization has compiled a 1981 figure of 13,353. Rebels Invite U.S. Representatives WASHINGTON, March 7 (AP) - A Salvadoran guerrilla leader has invited Speaker of the House Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. and other members of Congress to visit rebel-controlled territory, a spokesman for the Speaker said today. The invitation was made in a letter from Ferman Cienfuegos, commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces of the National Resistance, and was brought to Mr. O'Neill by three members of Congress who visited El Salvador last month. The spokesman, Christopher Matthews, said Mr. O'Neill had no plans to respond to the letter and he knows of no member of Congress who is likely to visit rebel-controlled territory. The letter from Mr. Cienfuegos disputes President Reagan's Jan. 28 certification that the Salvadoran military-civilian junta has made concerted efforts to respect human rights."
