"Ambassador Deane R. Hinton of the United States told a gathering of Salvadoran business executives recently that there had been ''serious excesses'' in human rights abuses in their country. And a report he sent to Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. noted that Government soldiers were responsible for most of the unexplained killings here. Nonetheless, President Reagan has ''certified'' that the Salvadoran Government has made significant progress in reducing human rights violations - a certification necessary to the continuance of American aid. The President's certification Jan. 28 would appear to contradict Ambassador Hinton's public declarations and his embassy's report. But most embassy officials defend the President's action, in part because they say there are some indications of a decline in the violence.  They have also disparaged El Salvador's human rights organizations, whose statistics paint a much bleaker picture of the human rights situation than do the embassy's. 'Some Abuses' Expected The American people understand that there will be ''some abuses by those engaged in battle,'' Ambassador Hinton told the businessmen, but ''Salvadoran authorities, and you, the people of El Salvador, have tolerated serious excesses.'' ''If there is one issue which could force our Congress to withdraw or seriously reduce its support for El Salvador, it is the issue of human rights,'' he added in his speech, which was his first public statement on the subject of human rights since he became Ambassador nine months ago. He told the businessmen that the law that required the certification by the President was ''tonto,'' which translates as ''foolish'' and ''stupid.'' ''No one would deny that there is still an atmosphere of violence,'' said an embassy official, who for ''security reasons'' asked not to be further identified. The United States Embassy here has been attacked by both right-wing and left-wing groups. 'What Choice Did He Have?' But, said the official, it is ''unrealistic'' to base aid to El Salvador on the Government's human rights record. ''It forces the President to overstate things in order to get the aid that must be sent. What choice did he have?'' The declaration by the President that the human rights situation has improved here finds very little support among a broad spectrum of Salvadoran society and even some United States Embassy officials. ''We invite him to come down here, to walk the streets of Salvador at 6 A.M. every day, and see the bodies, then tell us if there is progress in human rights here,'' said a 22-year-old worker at the Human Rights Commission of El Salvador. ''It is absolutely cynical to say'' that there has been any improvement in the Government's human rights performance, a senior Jesuit said here in a recent interview. Because of the murders of so many church workers, including four American women and the Archbishop of San Salvador, he like other church leaders asked not to be identified by name. Another senior Roman Catholic Church official called the certification ''totally contradictory'' to what was happening here and to the United States reaction to recent human rights deprivations in Poland. Great Disparity in Figures In separate interviews, each of these church officials said they had been told by different United States Embassy officials that the human rights situation in El Salvador had become worse, not better. There is a great disparity between the number of political assassinations recorded by the embassy and by the country's human rights groups, a disparity recognized by the embassy. At the same time, however, the American officials say that the human rights groups are not objective. According to a report by the United States Embassy, which was prepared in January and declassified last week, 5,407 people died as a result of political violence last year. ''We admit ours are not realistic,'' said an embassy official about the statistics in the report. ''They represent only a tiny portion of the people killed in El Salvador.'' Embassy statistics are based on reports in the local newspapers, which embassy officials acknowledge are limited almost entirely to deaths in the capital and other cities. In recent months, most of the deaths have been of peasants in remote rural areas. Relatives and friends of these victims often report to priests or the human rights groups. Group Is Called Prejudiced According to the Center for Documentation and Information at the University of Central America, which is also known as the Catholic University, 13,229 civilians were killed last year, compared with 9,826 in 1980. The Human Rights Commission of El Salvador, a nonprofit organization that was founded in 1978 at the urging of some of the country's Christian Democrats, puts the 1981 toll at 16,276, which is 20 percent higher than the commission's figure for 1980. And the legal aid office of the Roman Catholic Church here has a 1981 figure of 13,353. In his testimony before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Feb. 8, Thomas O. Enders, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs, referred to the ''prejudice'' of the Catholic University group. He called the Human Rights Commission an ''insurgent propaganda vehicle'' that ''has no credibility.'' He also noted that the church's legal aid office is not an official voice of the Archbishop. Some of the criticism of the human rights groups centers on their not reporting the number of victims of the leftist guerrillas who are fighting the Government. A Human Rights Commission worker, who was afraid to allow her name to be used, explained that her group did not record violence by the left because relatives and friends of those victims do not report to the human rights groups. Instead, she said, they go to military authorities and other Government institutions, which are receptive to complaints of violence by the left but not inclined to investigate charges of killings carried out or condoned by official groups. Left's Killings Called Fewer Another reason for not monitoring leftist violence, human rights workers say, is that the left is responsible for only a small percentage of the politically motivated assassinations, a conclusion that is supported by many priests, diplomats and the United States Embassy's report. Leftist victims tend usually to be selected: soldiers, members of rural paramilitary forces and Government spies.  When rebels kill one of these, they do not also kill ''his father, mother, brothers, sisters, cousins, aunts and uncles,'' said a diplomat whose country is a strong supporter of the Salvadoran Government. Killing by Government forces is more indiscriminate, he said. According to the embassy's statistics, security forces and ''leftist terrorists'' were each responsible for 13 percent of the political murders. ''Unknown assailants'' were responsible for 70 percent. ''It is generally believed in El Salvador that a large number of unexplained killings are carried out by the security forces, officially or unofficially,'' the embassy report said. 'A Law Unto Themselves' Noting that this is ''an impossible charge to sustain,'' the report, which was signed by Ambassador Hinton, added, ''We make no attempt to lighten the responsibility for the deaths of many hundreds, and perhaps thousands, which can be attributed to the security forces.'' Groups of armed civilians whom the Government has pressed into service are ''a law unto themselves in many areas'' and ''responsible for a fair share of anonymous murders, including many marked by torture,'' according to the report. The Government's respect for human rights ''has not improved, it has worsened,'' said a business leader who has received death threats from leftists. ''In no moment has it improved,'' said a 27-year-old bank clerk.  With his mother, he was grimly thumbing through the Human Rights Commission's albums containing photographs of mutilated victims. The bank clerk's brother had been picked up by uniformed soldiers several weeks earlier and had not been seen or heard of since, he said. ''They still pick you up off the streets and drag you from houses,'' said a 43-year-old laborer whose oldest son has just begun his studies at a private university. ''To be young is a crime,'' he added. The human rights organizations and the United States Embassy agree that a substantial percentage of the victims are in their late teens and early twenties. Communist Threat Cited In conversations with dozens of Salvadorans, the strongest endorsement for Mr. Reagan's certification came from the manager of a women's boutique in a modern shopping center. It is not important whether the human rights situation has improved or not, she said; the United States must send aid in order for her country to defeat the ''Communists.'' A Roman Catholic Church spokesman here said in a recent interview that President Reagan's appeal to light a candle as an expression of solidarity with the people of Poland at a time when there had been seven Polish workers killed and that country had been under martial law for less than two months was ''totally contradictory'' to the President's conclusion that the human rights situation here was improving. ''Here hundreds of workers have been killed'' and workers have no more rights than those in Poland, he said. In addition, he pointed out that for two years Salvadorans have lived under a state of seige that suspends constitutional liberties. The senior church official suggested that the ''only explanation'' for President Reagan's action was that ''in spite of everything, you have decided to support this Government because it is friendly to the United States.''"
