"El Salvador's Minister of Defense told a visiting United States Congressional delegation that if the Salvadoran Government was to defeat the rebels his army needed patrol boats, cargo planes, electronic surveillance equipment, 10 fighter jets and enough helicopters to simultaneously transport two battalions. The Congressmen calculated that this would require 182 helicopters, and the total package would cost about half a billion dollars.  According to the legislators, the Defense Minister, Gen. Guillermo Garcia, stressed that he did not want more United States advisers - there are 50 in the country - nor any ground troops. The delegation, which consisted of Representatives Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa; James L. Oberstar, Democrat of Minnesota, and Jim Coyne, Republican of Pennsylvania, concluded its three-day visit here with a news conference this afternoon. They all opposed further military aid, primarily because of human rights abuses by the Salvadoran armed forces.  ''I don't think we can develop a military solution,'' Mr. Coyne said, adding that he supported additional economic assistance.  ''A land without justice,'' Representative Oberstar said, ''sums up the El Salvador of today and the last 50 years.'' The Congressmen were the most critical of the accounts provided them by senior Salvadoran military commanders about how at least 20 civilians died three weeks ago in San Antonio Abad. Mr. Harkin said a colonel told them that his men had set an ambush and that the people were killed in a firefight with ''uniformed subversives.'' Today the Congressmen visited the area on the edge of the capital where the incident occurred. Representative Coyne said a 60-year-old woman told them that her grandson was dragged out of his house by the soldiers and later shot. Another woman said two of her sons died in the same manner. From the Human Rights Commission of El Salvador and United States Embassy personnel, the group said it learned that most victims had been shot in the back of the head and that many were dressed in night clothes. Calling such military tactics ''inhumane,'' Mr. Oberstar said the Salvadoran Government ''should not have our military support.'' In response to a question, Mr. Oberstar said there were also rights abuses by the leftist-led rebels. ''But the guerrillas aren't getting arms from the United States,'' he added. Answers Termed 'Evasive' The Congressmen also asked General Garcia about reports that during a search-and-destroy operation last December, Government soldiers killed several hundred civilians living in Mozote and eight surrounding hamlets in the eastern province of Morazan. General Garcia's answers were ''evasive,'' Representative Harkin said in an interview Thursday night.  Based on his discussions with United States Embassy personnel and rights groups here, Mr. Harkin concluded, ''There is every indication that innocent civilians were killed at the hands of the military.'' ''I do not know how many,'' he said, but they ''did not die in firefights.'' Mr. Harkin, the author of legislation to halt United States military aid to El Salvador, said Thursday night, ''If the military can get away with what it did in Mozote, what it did in San Antonio Abad and still receive United States aid, what belief is there that it will improve in the future?'' Mr. Coyne said ''it's become clear to me'' that there is a ''great chasm'' between the civilian and military leaders in the Salvadoran Government. He praised Jose Napoleon Duarte, the civilian President of the military-civilian junta, but said there was no evidence that Mr.  Duarte's ''compassion has trickled down to the military.'' Saying that the question of military aid to El Salvador was ''not a partisan issue,'' Mr. Coyne, the only Republican to visit El Salvador since Congressional hearings on aid began this month, said he would urge President Reagan ''to come down here and look at this regime.'' ''President Duarte is not the military Government here, and I think this is maybe the misconception'' that President Reagan shares with the American people, Mr. Coyne said."
