"The Reagan Administration likes to practice ''quiet diplomacy'' to deal with human rights violations by friendly nations. Last week, it went modestly public, including in its first rights report to Congress condemnations of the usual suspects (Moscow, Warsaw, Havana) plus relatively candid critiques of such allies as El Salvador, Guatemala, Ha iti, Israel, South Africa, Pakistan and Taiwan. In El Salvador, which had just received the Administration semiannual seal for improved housekeeping in human rights, the State Department said that ''individual members of the security forces may have been involved in unsolved crimes of murder with torture.'' Guatemala last year had three times as many political killings - 250 to 300 per month - as in 1980 and the increase was ''probably attributable to groups associated with the extreme right or with elements of the Government forces, rather than to the extreme left.'' The report also mentioned ''beatings, a traditional practice in Haitian jails;'' South Africa's apartheid system, which ''greatly limits (blacks') political expression;'' ''a deteriorating situation'' - extortion, torture, corruption and bribery - in Zaire; allegations of torture and also widespread censorship in Pakistan; reports of electronic monitoring of private homes in Taiwan, and new laws controlling political and related freedoms in South Korea. Israel, the report said, remained a democracy despite a history of crises and war, but ''discrimination (against the country's Arabs) reportedly occurs in such areas as employment.'' ''Full democratic protections,'' it added, were not provided in the occupied West Bank. Costly Candor The United Nations Human Rights Commission was looking for a new director last week. After five years on the job, Theo van Boven quit in disgust over rules that sweep many violations out of sight. Citing reports of political murders in Chile, El Salvador and Guatemala, Mr. van Boven, a Dutch citizen who reportedly was on the way out because of impolitic plain speaking, added that he found it ''inexplicable and indefensible for the United Nations not to react urgently in situations of gross violations of human rights which arise between sessions of the commission.''"
