"Having certified the good behavior of the El S alvador junta, President Reagan is ready for the next logical step. U nless there is a last-minute change of mind, he will shortly c ertify that Chile's dictatorship and its torturers are making ' 'significant progress'' in respect for human rights. Some thought it was Orwellian to give a stamp of approval to El Salvador's armed forces immediately after evidence surfaced that they had carried out another massacre of civilians. To declare that Chile has met the test laid down by Congress for U.S. aid would be if anything more cynical -and more humiliating to the United States. It would be humiliating because the Chilean Government, over the last six months, has made a point of expressing its contempt for this country's human rights concerns. Item: Jeane Kirkpatrick, U.S. representative to the United Nations, visited Chile last August to express the Reagan Administration's intention to improve relations. The president of the Chilean Commission on Human Rights, Jaime Castillo, asked to meet her; she said she was too busy. Two days after she left, Mr.  Castillo, a distinguished lawyer and former Minister of Justice, was expelled from Chile. Item: Last Dec. 4 in a U.N. committee Mrs. Kirkpatrick's deputy, Carl Gershman, opposed a resolution to continue paying special attention to the human rights situation in Chile. He said it was wrong to single out Chile. Six days later two other leading officials of the Chilean Human Rights Commission were arrested and held without charges. They are still in prison. One of the human rights spokesmen arrested in December, Pablo Fuenzalida, was gruesomely tortured. He was seen in a Santiago prison last month by a U.S. visitor, Aryeh Neier of the Americas Watch Committee, a private group that monitors conditions in this hemisphere. Mr. Fuenzalida described what had been done to him. He was tied, naked, to a metal bedframe. Wires were attached to his legs, testicles and chest. As electric shocks were applied, a man asked him questions about the Human Rights Commission, the hierarchy of the Catholic Church, politics. Later he was dressed and questioned in front of a movie or television camera; when his answers were not satisfactory, the camera was turned off and an electric prod applied to his body. When Mr. Neier saw Mr. Fuenzalida, his body showed the effects of trauma. His right side was partly paralyzed, and he could not use his arm sufficiently to shake hands. Congress bannned U.S. arms aid to Chile in 1976 because of the brutal repression there. Last year the Reagan Administration asked Congress to lift the ban. It did, but required President Reagan to certify certain things before arms could be given or sold to Chile. Mr. Reagan must declare that Chile ''has made significant progress in complying with internationally-recognized principles of human rights.'' He must also find that Chile has cooperated in ''bringing to justice'' Chilean intelligence agents indicted by a U.S. grand jury for the assassination of Orlando Letelier, the former Chilean Foreign Minister, in Washington in 1976. It will take even greater cynicism to certify the second point than the first. The Chilean Government has crudely blocked all efforts to extradite the accused conspirators. Last month, in a transparently fraudulent gesture, the Chilean supreme court declared the case still open. But no proceedings are pending or planned. Despite the formidable obstacle of truth, State Department officials have drafted a certification for President Reagan. There is pressure to hurry because some American companies want to display their products at an air show in Chile next month. As the examples of Chile and El Salvador sh ow, the Reagan Administration's evident willingness to certi fy just about anything has the effect of weakening America n influence. Gen. Augus to Pinochet, the Chilean President, believes that his Governm ent will not really be called to account, so he feels free to mock the United States on human rights. The U.S. is also being hurt in international forums. When we opposed the U.N. resolution on Chile, our European allies voted for it and it passed easily. This week the United States tried to get the U.N. Commission on Human Rights to put a special item about Poland on its agenda - and had thrown back at it the argument that it would be wrong to single out one country. There is reason to think that all this is clear now to the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, Elliott Abrams. But American influence will be restored only if his superiors actually draw the line somewhere. In Chile there should be no certification unless General Pinochet agrees at a minimum to let exiles return and stop official torture. Otherwise the United States will be in the position of demanding decency and then giving a certificate of good behavior to the indecent."
