"The American Civil Liberties Union and the Americas Watch Committee accused the Salvadoran Government today of a systematic denial of human rights, including dozens of politically motivated murders each week and the widespread use of torture. In a 275-page report designed to persuade the Reagan Administration not to continue military assistance and sales to El Salvador, the groups also accused the Government there of responsibility for the disappearance of more than 600 people, of repressing the Catholic Church and of suspending freedom of the press. Continued American aid to El Salvador depends on certification from President Reagan that El Salvador is trying to foster human rights and is working to end torture and murder by elements of its armed services. ''The violations of human rights taking place in El Salvador are not aberrations,'' the report said. ''Rather, they are selectively directed against those perceived as opposing the country's economic and political system.'' In a statement with the report, the A.C.L.U. said it ordinarily concentrated on rights cases in the United States but became involved in this debate because American involvement was so significant in ''civil liberties violations'' in El Salv ador . The Americas Watch Committee is a private organization that moni tors human rights in theWestern Hemisphere. Most Common in Rural Areas The report said American support for El Salvador had increased during the period of greatest violation of human rights.  The groups said violence and repression were most prevalent in rural areas and said that ''torture of the most brutal kind'' was common in El Salvador. They said ''arbitrary arrests'' were widespread and the right to fair trails had been abrogated. ''The revolutionary governing junta of El Salvador, both by commission and omission, is responsible for a widespread and systematic pattern of gross violations of human rights,'' the report concluded. Meanwhile, the State Department made public a statement from last week's Salvadoran Episcopal Conference supporting elections.  According to the State Department, the statement said: ''We see in the approaching elections, scheduled for March 28 of this year, a faint glimmer of hope, a possible beginning of a solution to the present crisis of the country.''"
