"To the Editor: Your Jan. 13 editorial (''Guatemala Amok'') implies that the Reagan Administration has not consistently tried to renew military ties with the Government of Guatemala. It further states that after Guatemala failed to respond to the suggestion that it moderate ''the slaughter of its opponents,'' the Reagan Admi nistration ''wisely'' decided ''to let Guatemala fend for itself.'' Nothing could be further from the truth. If the United States has ''avoided complicity'' in the daily slaughter in Guatemala, it is due solely to the constant vigilance and well-coordinated efforts of human rights advocates and concerned members of Congress. On June 5, 1981, the Reagan Administration approved $3.2 million for military trucks and jeeps for Guatemala in a slick maneuver sidestepping the human rights laws prohibiting such a transaction.  In July, 16 Guate-malan military officers were brought to the U.S.  for pilot training in direct violation of the human rights provisions in U.S. public law. The State Department then announced it intended to sell helicopter spare parts to the Guatemalan military. Outraged by these actions, the House Foreign Affairs Committee called hearings on U.S.-Guatemala policy, and the helicopter parts transaction was frozen. However, as late as November, State Department officials were feeling out representatives on the House committee to find out if enough sentiment had changed that it might be considered ''safe'' to send the helicopter spare parts to Guatemala. It hadn't. Finally, in December, the Administration wanted to vote in favor of an $18 million non-basic human needs loan to Guatemala scheduled in the Inter-American Development Bank. Once again, such a vote would have been a direct violation of U.S. public law. On Dec. 8, the Administration faced a bristling House Banking subcommittee, which threatened to see the Administration in court if it approved the loan. That ev ening, word was received that the Guatemalan Government had ''withdra wn its request'' for the loan. If the Reagan Administration has ''let Guatemala fend for itself,'' it is because of the hard research done by national human rights organizations that has been made available to such Congressional members of conscience as Chairmen Barnes (Inter-American Affairs), Bonker (Human Rights) and Patterson (International Development Institutions and Finance). If you are going to give credit, at least give it where it is due. CYNTHIA M. BUHL, Human Rights Coordinator, Coalition for a New Foreign and Military Policy, Washington, Jan. 14, 1982"
