"It's taken three years for the Reagan Administration to lift the rocks in El Salvador and confront the wormy spectacle beneath. For compelling reasons, the President is finally demanding that San Salvador rid itself of the patrons of right-wing terror. He offers the carrot of more aid. But after so many false certifications of progress, he also needs to brandish the stick of cutting aid. Belatedly, the Administration's strategists have recognized the reality that death squad murders are not the work of freelance crazies. The perpetrators have a precise political purpose: to destroy El Salvador's land reform and its sponsors and to turn next March's presidential election into a plebiscite that legitimizes Roberto d'Aubuisson, the president of the interim Assembly and paladin of the violent right. So far, the terror is working. A cowed Assembly has trimmed by half the amount of land available for distribution to peasants. Even as this crippling measure was debated, its opponents heard death threats by telephone. By raising the legal holdings from 360 to 600 acres, the measure eliminates most of the coffee, sugar and cotton farms from land reform. The promoters of the death squads talk about anti-Communism, but it is the anti-Communism of Al Capone. Their targets aren't guerrillas but trade unionists, Christian Democrats, peasants and businessmen. Their money comes from absentee oligarchs. Their gunmen are drawn from three ''security'' forces. And their political inspiration and protection comes from Mr. d'Aubuisson and his allies - not outsiders but a cancer within the system.  Ridding El Salvador of this cancer, if it can be done at all, will require more than the exiling of a few notorious killers or America's expulsion of their Miami paymasters. It requires changing institutions and attitudes. It requires open American support for beleaguered democrats and unequivocal hostility to their tormentors on the right as well as the left. Otherwise, the elections on which Americans are banking will enthrone the masters of the death squads.  Hopelessness, endless killings and guerrillas controlling a third of the country - all this constitutes ''la situacion'' of a country edging to nightfall. As our colleague Lydia Chavez has reported, one feeling is shared by most Salvadorans, urban or rural, rich or poor: ''If there is any hope for an early improvement in 'the situation' it rests on decisions that can only be made by the United States.'' It is this poignant faith that Mr. Reagan will disappoint if his remedies now amount to prescribing more aspirin."
