"Nearly a generation after turbaned clerics occupied the palaces of kings, Iran is a country of broken promises, a place of unnerving unpredictability and fitful repression intended to keep the Government in power and the population at bay. There is no serious challenge to the theocracy that has ruled for more than 16 years; even an intelligence analysis prepared by the Clinton Administration last December concludes that Iran's Government is durable, and that neither isolation nor embrace by the outside world is likely to overturn it. But in periodic visits to Iran since Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini overthrew the monarchy in 1979, and in dozens of interviews during a recent trip, it became evident to this reporter that the religious oratory that once drove a nation into the streets no longer has the power to inspire.  The masses, in whose name the revolution was made, now long for better days. Just three years ago, a newly elected Parliament seemed ready to ratify President Hashemi Rafsanjani's bold program of economic reform; today, that movement, and the hopes it aroused, have been abandoned. It is not that Iranians are concerned about whether their Government is building nuclear weapons or committing terrorist acts around the world. Those are American preoccupations that bear little relationship to day-to-day life for the 65 million people in Iran. But in a country where many still admire America, the Clinton Administration's trade embargo contributes to a general sense that things can only get worse. In the effort to hold on to power, Iran's leaders have moved in contradictory directions. To keep the system strong enough to govern but supple enough to survive, they have simultaneously imposed strict limits and permitted a surprising degree of room to maneuver -- allowing the elected Parliament to override the preferences of the President and permitting scholarly journals to criticize the country's one-party system. Just as there are rigid rules, there are endless ways around them. It is, for example, official Government policy to allow young men to buy their way out of compulsory military service and to sell at high costs permits that allow motorists to violate Teheran's traffic restrictions. The result is a steady degradation of the ideals that brought the revolutionary leaders to power, an inefficiency that has strangled the economy, a cynicism that has fueled corruption and an unpredictability about everyday life. ""There has been nothing dramatic, just continual deterioration,"" said Ibrahim Yazdi, the leader of the Freedom Movement, Iran's leading secular liberal party, which has been banned. ""We have a political crisis. We have an economic crisis. We have a social crisis. That creates uncertainty and unpredictability, so no one is making any long-term plans. People feel they've been betrayed, that the revolution has been kidnapped."" Dr. Yazdi, a former professor of medicine at Baylor University in Texas who served as Foreign Minister during the revolution's first year, typifies the tension between the permissible and the forbidden. He is dismissed as a man of the past and allowed to criticize the Government, although only to outsiders. The Government considers him so harmless that the Ministry of Islamic Guidance now offers to arrange visits to his comfortable apartment in central Teheran. But his party newspaper and headquarters have been closed for a decade, and the party itself has been prevented from holding meetings, publishing documents and fielding candidates in elections. The Government has harassed shopkeepers and expelled university students who support the movement. ""We have set limits on ourselves because we are in a vulnerable situation,"" Dr. Yazdi said. ""It is very difficult for us in this twilight zone."" Restrictions Arbitrary Curbs On Everyday Life Iran is not like Syria, where terror of the Government runs so deep that ordinary people avoid political discussions. It is not even like Saudi Arabia, where any criticism of the rulers goes on only behind closed doors. Even in the early days of Iran's revolution, political protest was widespread, although largely anonymous, as people felt that the chaos that came with the end of the monarchy somehow offered them a layer of protection. Indeed, the last few years have witnessed an explosion of public criticism. The two favorite recent topics are inflation, which has driven up the prices of many goods by 100 percent in the last year, and Parliament's ban last month on the satellite dishes that for two years had enabled Iranians to receive programs like ""Baywatch"" and BBC News. ""Taking away the satellites is taking away the individual's freedom,"" one reader wrote in a public opinion column of Salam, a newspaper influenced by clerics that is nevertheless highly critical of the Government. ""This is nothing but a ploy to distract people's attention from the country's economic problems."" Another reader wrote, ""How come the Government is capable of rounding up all the satellite dishes but is incapable of stopping inflation?"" The satellite dish was one of the most hotly debated issues in Parliament last winter. ""We have no right to search people's homes,"" said Abbas Abbasi, a deputy from Bandar Abbas during the floor debate. ""Even with a search warrant, do we have the right to follow everyone to the grave?"" People have responded to the ban by hiding the dishes in trees and under leaves and plastic sheeting, and by dismantling them every morning. That sort of circumvention of the rules is both deceptive and dangerous, because the Government can shift signals suddenly and without warning. The tone of the newspaper Salam, for example, has become much milder after its editor, Abbas Abdi, spent three months in prison in 1993. No charges were ever filed against him. In February, Jahan-e Islam, which is published by the brother of the spiritual leader Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, was shut down. The official explanation was that the paper ""created doubts, printed untrue stories and insulted the religious beliefs of the Muslim nation."" In recent months, the Government has demanded that Iranians working in nearly every embassy in Teheran report on diplomatic activities, several ambassadors said. Other Iranians working with foreigners have been summoned to the Ministry of Islamic Guidance and offered an unappealing choice: either spy on your employers or sign a statement swearing never to have contact again with foreigners. A number of the 134 writers who signed a petition last year protesting Government censorship have been interrogated and pressed to withdraw their signatures. By contrast, since last year the Government has allowed the publication of such scholarly opinion journals as Goftegu, or Dialogue, which advocates a more participatory democracy. ""You have to create your own way of saying things,"" said Ramin Jahanbegloo, a French-educated political philosopher who helped start Goftegu. For the last few years, it has been official Government policy to ignore what people do in their homes. But carrying it out often depends on the whim of the neighborhood. At a wedding reception for about 400 people in the garden of a northern Teheran home this month, the family of the groom paid the official neighborhood committees thousands of dollars to ignore the party. Homemade -- and illegal -- vodka was pouring from pitchers and dinner was being served when a handful of stern men burst in. Members of the band threw their instruments onto a nearby roof and escaped. Women in party dresses rushed inside to find their floor-length coats and head scarves. ""They ruined the party,"" one guest said as she threw a trench coat over her strapless black dress. Other guests sniped that the family did not pay a big enough bribe, most of them leaving even before the cake was cut. The father of the groom spent the night in jail. Only the most fervent perpetuate the fiction that all is right with the revolution. ""Our life is fine and we have no problem with inflation,"" said Akram Omrani, a trusted Government watchdog who searched visitors before Friday prayers at Teheran University, confiscating the lipstick and mascara of women guests. ""We eat three meals a day -- not like my cousin who manages a hotel in Los Angeles. She can afford only one meal a day. In fact, tonight we are slaughtering two sheep to have a big party."" But that assessment was too much for a second official, who ran after the visitors to apologize for the cosmetics confiscation and to explain. ""We let a woman take a lipstick inside and she got arrested,"" the woman said. ""We can't really afford to live. Tell that to America, please.""  Opposition Sudden Violence And Deep Fear There is an air of fear in Akbarabad, a dusty, unexceptional shantytown like dozens of others that sprang up outside Teheran after the revolution, when building codes were abandoned in the name of building cheap housing for the people. Water is scarce, electricity is sporadic and social services are nonexistent. Those inhabitants lucky enough to have jobs in Teheran commute by minibus every day; the unemployed sit on the stoops in front of shops drinking Zamzan, an Iranian version of cola. All suffer from the crippling inflation. When independent bus drivers doubled their prices early one morning in April, the commuters rebelled. Witnesses said they blocked the minibuses from leaving the village. The rioters moved on to Islamshahr, a much larger town on the way to Teheran, smashing windows and setting fire to banks, gas stations and government buildings along the way. By late morning, the Government rushed in elite anti-riot police officers, who opened fire in hit-and-run battles with villagers throughout the day. Plainclothes intelligence officials patrolled the streets in search of informants. By the time the riots were put down at nightfall, a number of people had died -- fewer than ""the fingers of the hands"" according to Ayatollah Mohammed Yazdi, chief of the judiciary; 15 to 30, according to diplomats in Teheran. The next day, hundreds of police officers lined the streets as the local authorities bused thousands of people into Islamshahr to march in pro-Government demonstrations. The streets were strewn with broken windows, burned tires, bricks and ruble. Dozens of people were arrested or questioned. The families of the dead were made to repay the police for the bullets they had fired; public mourning was prohibited. But the bus fares came down again. The disturbance was not as serious as one in Qazvin last August, when the local commander refused to fire on the crowds. That prompted the Government to expand special rapid-reaction units that did not hesitate to move against the rioters in Akbarabad and Islamshahr. But people in both places are still afraid to speak. ""I heard the shooting,"" said one owner of a dry goods store. ""Of course, it terrified people. The families of the dead don't wear black for mourning for fear of retaliation. But people are not going to talk about the deaths, so don't ask about it."" At Bank Tejarat in nearby Islamshahr, the rioters set fire to the building. ""Don't ask political questions,"" said one of the managers. ""We are ordered not to talk."" Economics Runaway Inflation And Corruption Ayatollah Khomeini used to say that the people did not rise up against the monarchy over the price of watermelons and that economics was for the donkeys. But the discontent throughout the country today seems to have little to do with politics and everything to do with money. ""It's the person with money, not the martyr, who gets the respect,"" said Nasser Hadian, a political science professor at Teheran University. Just a year ago, President Rafsanjani was talking about the need to have only one rate of exchange, to privatize the economy and to eliminate all subsidies. But in recent months, he has abandoned his economic reform program. Last year, the inflation rate was unofficially pegged at 50 to 100 percent, while the salaries of public officials have remained constant. Per capita oil income in real terms is about one-fourth of what it was in the two years before the revolution. Public disgust with the economy is so intense that a reader of Salam wrote to the newspaper recently to suggest that since Iran's money is now so worthless, the Central Bank should remove Khomeini's image from all Iranian rials. Prices of most consumer goods fluctuate with the value of the dollar. In fact, the dollar so dominates the Iranian economy that another reader of Salam wrote: ""All the Government's business is done with dollars. Let's just make the dollar our official currency."" The inability of Iranians to make ends meet has contributed to rampant corruption. During the monarchy, aides to Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi got rich on Government contracts with foreigners. Today, the amounts paid may be smaller, but the corruption extends to every level of the Government -- from the heads of foundations who import goods and hand out contracts to the traffic police and garbage collectors. ""If you want a form signed, a visa stamped, a court case decided, a piece of furniture cleared through customs, someone has to be paid,"" said one diplomat with longer experience in Iran. ""In the Shah's time, it was only the top echelon. Now everyone has to be paid."" Ayatollah Khomeini built his revolution on promises to lift Iran's ""oppressed"" out of grinding poverty. And when Mehdi Bazargan was named his first Prime Minister in 1979, he was so self-effacing that he refused to use the Government's chauffeur-driven Mercedes, preferring his Iranian-made Peykan. But in an interview with the German newspaper Frankfurter Rundschau just before his death last January, Mr. Bazargan revealed a sense of betrayal. ""The scale of corruption is breathtaking,"" he said. Asserting that the Government enjoys the support of not even 5 percent of the people, he still asked, ""Who would take over this Government? The painful question is this: Do we want another Afghanistan?"" Politics Leaders Jockeying For Succession President Rafsanjani has more than two years left before he steps down, but as his dream of economic reform has failed miserably, his political standing has steadily declined. In an interview with ABC News two weeks ago, Mr. Rafsanjani asserted that the United States missed a chance to improve relations when it canceled a $1 billion deal with an American oil company in April, and said that he opposed the decision by Parliament to ban satellite dishes. But such politically sensitive statements would have portrayed Mr. Rafsanjani as soft on the United States and Western culture, and when Iranian television broadcast the interview, they both were deleted. Mr. Rafsanjani has said he has no intention of trying to amend the Constitution to allow himself to run for a third term in 1997, and the talk of Teheran these days is about who will replace him. One long-shot candidate is Gholam Hussein Karbaschi, Teheran's Mayor, who was trained as a cleric but wears layman's clothes. In six years as Mayor, he has bulldozed apartment and office buildings constructed without city approval, removed revolutionary graffiti from walls, planted thousands of trees and opened more than 100 new parks -- all in the name of transforming Teheran into a city that works. To pay for this, Mr. Karbaschi, who is 42, raised taxes and extorted huge sums of money from shopkeepers and traders. If a shopkeeper refused to pay up, he dug up his driveway and planted a tree; when traffic in Teheran paralyzed the city and destroyed the air, he banned all traffic -- except by motorists who paid the city a hefty fee; when some small factories refused to move out of the city, he cut off their water supply. This sort of behavior has made Mr. Karbaschi,, the most loved and the most reviled man in Teheran. ""Great people in history are like that,"" he said in an interview. But even Mr. Karbaschi's powers are limited. He was unable to stop a move by the Revolutionary Guards last year to fence off the 14th, 15th and 16th holes of the only private golf course in Teheran. An official building went up quickly; it was called a mosque and now it cannot be torn down. There are plans to use the 11th and 12th holes for a hotel. ""The work of the disciplinary forces is much more important than golf,"" Mr. Karbaschi said. ""Maybe we can build a quieter place for the golfers."" Asked whether he would run for higher office, Mr. Karbaschi said: ""This is not the United States where everyone tries to be President. Here there are no advantages to being President, just headaches."" The front- runner for President, at the moment at least, is Ali Akbar Natiq-Noori, the speaker of Parliament, the position Mr. Rafsanjani himself held before running for President the first time in 1987. Mr. Natiq-Noori is a hojatolislam, one rank lower than an ayatollah. But unlike most clerics in Iran, he wears well-tailored robes, looks women straight in the eye and smiles a lot, a plus for any politician, even in Iran. ""It's a hereditary characteristic,"" Mr. Natiq-Noori explained in an interview. ""My father smiled a lot. But the real factor that gives me a very pleasant character is that I'm a sportsman. Why just today, I got up at 4 A.M. to climb mountains for two hours."" Mr. Natiq-Noori is an expert horseman as well. He was shown on Iranian television two weeks ago riding with tribesmen during a visit to Luristan province, which is the Iranian equivalent of kissing babies in an American campaign. A close associate of Ayatollah Khamenei, the Iranian spiritual leader, Mr. Natiq-Noori is particularly interested in explaining that Iran has been misunderstood in the West. His description of the status of the author Salman Rushdie captures the complexity of decision-making in Iran today. In a religious decree before his death, Ayatollah Khomeini ordered the assassination of Mr. Rushdie, author of ""The Satanic Verses,"" which the Iranian leader considered blasphemous. Mr. Natiq-Noori repeated the Government's official position that it has no intention of assassinating Mr. Rushdie, but that it cannot rescind a religious decree. ""We will never undertake the responsibility of killing him now,"" he said. ""It's a religious verdict, not a political verdict."" In recent weeks, the European Union has tried to persuade Iran's Government to pledge in writing not to send death squads to kill Mr. Rushdie, to renounce terrorism in all forms and to confirming that its relations with other countries are based on international law. Iran has yet to do so. Asked whether or not Mr. Rushdie should die, Mr. Natiq-Noori replied, ""If he were to die by himself that would be a good solution."" Graph: ""KEEPING TRACK: Inflation in Iran"" shows monthly percent change from '72-'94. (Source: International Monetary Fund) (pg. A8)"
