"For 40 years, the urbane, Western-educated Hassan al-Turabi has maneuvered through democracies and dictatorships in the Sudan, sometimes serving in a Cabinet, sometimes sitting in a jail cell, but always pushing the cause of Islamic fundamentalism. Now, with his National Islamic Front controlling the military Government here, Mr. Turabi, as polished and, some would say, as beguiling as ever, is orchestrating a bigger goal: the spread of fundamentalism to the moderate Arab countries and the rest of Africa. Mr. Turabi is the de facto leader of the Sudan, although Gen. Omar Hassan al-Bashir, who led the 1989 coup that brought the military to power, is the head of state. Mr. Turabi describes the march of fundmentalism as inevitable, as it moves to fill the vacuum left by the failures of Western-inspired African socialism and Arab nationalism. 'Nothing Else Left' ""Islam is the only force that remains in this part of the world,"" said Mr. Turabi, wearing a traditional white flowing robe during an interview at his sprawling house in one of Khartoum's upper-class suburbs. ""There is nothing else left to inspire the young, to mobilize them, to give them a vision, a sense of allegiance."" In the Sudan, Mr. Turabi says, there has been the time and the freedom for the Islamic front to become a moderate movement led by an elite, not from the street as was the case in Iran. And as a country that is dominated by Arabs in the north and black Africans in the south, the Sudan is an ideal springboard for Islamic fundamentalism in Arab countries and Africa, he said. Many Sudanese argue that Mr. Turabi's vision of an Islamic world held together by religion and economic interdependence could be taken less seriously if it were not for two factors. First, they say, fundamentalism appeals to people who are both poor and religious. Second, although the Sudan's economic disarray would normally disqualify it as the springboard for anything, Mr. Turabi seems to have solved this problem by bringing in the Iranians, who are helping out on many fronts, from oil to military training. An American diplomat here said Mr. Turabi's Islamic fundamentalism had emerged since the 1989 coup as anti-democratic, a violator of human rights and a protector of international terrorist groups. Since coming to power, the military Government has banned the Sudan's well-entrenched political parties, imprisoned suspected opponents and, international human rights organizations say, tortured detainees. But Mr. Turabi, 59 years old, who has degrees in law from Khartoum University, London University and the Sorbonne, and fluent in Arabic, English and French, presents the Islamization of the Sudan in a milder way. Focus on Islamic Law For example, he said, the Islamic legal code, sharia, which calls for the amputation of limbs as the punishment for armed robbery, is now being enforced in a responsible manner. He said that so far there had not been amputations, because it ""took a long time to review a case."" As Attorney General in 1983 in the Government of Gaafar al-Nimeiry, Mr. Turabi was the architect of sharia-based laws that resulted in a number of amputations that were carried out in public. Mr. Turabi distances himself from that period, saying, ""Nimeiry liked drama."" Mr. Turabi said the recently announced Islamic dress code for women was being enforced by ""moral education."" And he portrayed the new Government as providing for the vast underclass: an Islamic ""poor tax"" will provide funds for welfare services, he said. But educated Sudanese, who grudglingly admire Mr. Turabi's skill at using an ideology that has catapulted him to power, point to contrasts between Mr. Turabi's words and the Government's deeds. Deeds vs. Words Since early December, the housing authorities in Khartoum have bulldozed the shacks of about 250,000 impoverished squatters; many lived in their hovels for more than a decade, Sudanese and Western aid officals said. The demolitions have been justified by the authorities as an effort to clean up the environment. Others say the squatters, many of them Christian and animist southerners, were moved to quash potential opposition. And while Mr. Turabi argues that only moral persuasion is being used to change dress habits, women report differently. In Government offices, women have been told to wear clothes that cover them from their head to their ankles or lose their jobs. Mr. Turabi is taking the long view. He is not too concerned, he said, about the military takeover in Algeria after the fundamentalists' political success there. ""I don't mind,"" he said, ""because whatever the West will do, Islam will still ultimately overcome."""
