"To the Editor:  Elliott Abrams's diatribe against ''The Myopia of Human Rights Advocates'' (Op-Ed Aug. 10) comes as no surprise. For some time now, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights has been attacking the U.S. human rights community, instead of working with us toward a common goal. Mr. Abrams takes issue with three well-known and respected organizations - Amnesty International, the Council of Europe and Helsinki Watch - and with Western human rights groups in general for their criticism of Turkey. He speaks of ''the clamor of ill-informed and self- righteous critics'' less concerned with human rights than with ''making a political point.'' The fact that Mr. Abrams has been clamoring about Helsinki Watch's reports on Turkey while he has never found ''shallow analysis'' in our many reports condemning human- rights abuses in the Soviet-bloc countries seems to reveal his own political agenda: to promote U.S. geopolitical interests with regard to Turkey, a ''loyal member of NATO.'' Mr. Abrams faults Helsinki Watch for calling the 1983 parliamentary elections in Turkey a farce. How would he  characterize that election, which excluded all pre-coup political leaders and the country's two major political parties?  Can one conceive of an election campaign in the United States during which former Presidents Carter and Ford and some hundred other political leaders were forbidden to speak publicly and from which the Republican and Democratic Parties were banned?  Mr. Abrams misquotes me when he says that I called the victory of the Motherland Party a demonstration of ''the Turkish people's lack of confidence in the return to parliamentary democracy.'' What I said (''Human Rights in Turkey,'' Op-Ed July 13) was that the resounding victory of the Motherland Party over the party favored by the generals showed the Turkish people's lack of confidence in the generals  as the force that would return Turkey to parliamentary democracy.  From the speech that Mr. Abrams delivered in Turkey on July 11, one would never know that there are many thousands of political prisoners in Turkey or that at the moment he was speaking there were hunger strikes in the Turkish prisons protesting torture and inhuman conditions.  In that speech, Mr. Abrams bent over backward to please and flatter, offering only this argument for stopping torture: that ''the brutality of a policeman or a prison guard (could) subvert the work of your able diplomats, your skilled officials and your courageous generals in preserving Turkey's name.'' During his visit to Turkey, Mr. Abrams attacked Western critics of Turkey's human rights practices, making it appear that the U.S. Government does not take such criticism seriously. At this key time, when voices are tentatively speaking out in Turkey urging an end to torture and urging amnesty for prisoners of conscience, Mr. Abrams has undercut whatever effect international public opinion has had in increasing the sensitivity of Turkish leaders to criticism. Mr. Abrams gave a similar signal to Turkish leaders when he turned down an opportunity to visit Dyarbakir Prison in Turkish Kurdistan, possibly the worst hellhole on earth. Such indifference to human suffering is unforgivable. Elliott Abrams should be directing his energy and anger not against those who are trying to help victims of human rights abuse, but against dictators throughout the world who are murdering, torturing, jailing, beating and otherwise persecuting citizens who dare to dissent. JERI LABER Executive Director U.S. Helsinki Watch Committee Washington, Aug. 13, 1984"
