"When the Palestinians began limited self-rule two years ago, Yasir Arafat took on a job that might tax even an experienced national leader. His Palestinian Authority must provide services to an already impoverished region whose hardships are intensified by Israel's closing of Palestinian territories after terrorist bombings in Jerusalem and Tel Aviv. He has been rightly pressed by Israel and the United states to combat Palestinian terrorist organizations. But as Mr. Arafat tries to govern the Palestinians and negotiate with the Israelis, he has abused the rights of his own people. He is now the architect of repressive policies and conduct that may do lasting harm to his Authority and to the peace effort. Palestinians hoped that after 30 years of a harsh Israeli occupation, self-rule would bring basic freedoms. Mr. Arafat has disappointed them. Hundreds of prisoners have been jailed for months without charges. In two years, seven people have died in detention. Police routinely use torture during interrogations. Books critical of Mr. Arafat have been banned, and critical journalists censored, beaten and imprisoned. State Security Courts hold secret, midnight trials of defendants who are assigned lawyers and told of the charges only when the trials begin. The trials frequently last just a few minutes. Mr. Arafat has ignored challenges from the freely elected Palestinian Legislative Council to improve his record on human rights. The Authority defends the abuses by citing American and Israeli pressure to fight terrorism. The pressure is warranted, but should not be read as a license to violate civil liberties and the rule of law. Unhappily, American officials have often failed to make that clear. Vice President Al Gore and others have praised the State Security Courts. Palestinian police rounded up about 1,000 suspected Hamas members after the suicide bombings in Israel in February and March. Moving against terrorism was necessary to stop the bombings and save the peace, but Washington should have tempered its praise with criticism of indiscriminate arrests. Many Palestinians were picked up simply because they opposed the peace agreements or once indicated support for Hamas. Mr. Arafat has made the fight against terrorism an excuse to suppress dissent. Eight hundred of those arrested after the bombings are still in jail, uncharged and unable to see lawyers. If there is evidence implicating them in acts of terror, they should be charged. If not, they should be released. It is also hard to see how civilians are protected by the Palestinian police force's use of torture or by the arrest and intimidation of many of Mr. Arafat's critics. As they used to do against the Israelis, Palestinians are staging general strikes and protests against Mr. Arafat. His repression feeds extremism and, in the process, puts the peace process at risk. American officials have been reluctant to criticize Mr. Arafat, except in a few particularly outrageous cases, for fear of fueling opposition to the peace process. But silence is even more harmful. Mr. Arafat should recognize the destructiveness of his policies and set the Palestinian Authority on a new course."
