"An international legal group that monitors human rights asserted in a report today that the Israeli Army's Ketziot detention center for Palestinians was ''crowded and inhumane'' and a violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention. ''Ketziot's location in a remote part of Israel proper, its extremely harsh desert climate, and its crowded, inhumane living conditions combine to create an untenable environment in which to maintain long-term administrative detentions,'' the report says. The report was compiled by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, a New York-based group. It has previously issued human rights reports on Nicaragua, Pakistan, Haiti, Poland and South Africa, among other countries. It is the first foreign human rights group to report on Ketziot, which has been the subject of controversy since it opened in March. Team Visits Camp Committee representatives visited Ketziot, a sprawling tent camp opened in the Negev desert to hold thousands of Palestinians arrested in the uprising in the occupied territories. On two trips in the spring and summer of this year they met with Palestinian detainees and the Israeli authorities. Ketziot is the most disputed of several detention centers run by the army. The Lawyers Committee report did not examine conditions at the other centers. The report says the transfer of Palestinian prisoners from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip to Ketziot is a breach of the Fourth Geneva Convention, which requires that the detainees be jailed within the territory occupied. Israel has said its own laws supersede the Geneva Convention. The study also calls the army's administrative detention of two Palestinian lawyers and four Palestinian employees of an Arab legal aid society ''a serious blow to independent human rights monitoring in the West Bank.'' Army Upholds Detentions The military justified the administrative detentions, which allow the authorities to detain Arabs for up to six months without formal charge or trial, by asserting that all six Palestinians were members of the outlawed Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine. The army said the allegations were substantiated by ''secret evidence.'' The Lawyers Committee report criticizes the detentions because the ''authorities did not make any specific public charges of illegal activity or disclose the evidence against these individuals.'' ''The critical element in the appeals process remains the fact that the secret evidence is not made available to detainees or their lawyers, and therefore cannot be effectively challenged by counsel,'' the report says. ''The Government of Israel,'' it concludes, ''has exceeded its detention power'' under the Fourth Geneva Convention. The Lawyers Committee describes physical abuse of detainees by Israeli soldiers, including frequent beatings and use of collective punishments, an ''irregular supply of water grossly inadequate for detainees' needs in the intense desert heat,'' unsanitary conditions, poor food, lack of reading material, and forced labor. Judges Cite Overcrowding In June, Ketziot's commander, Col. David Tsemach, said, ''This prison is run absolutely according to army regulations.'' But in November, three Israeli Supreme Court judges who visited the camp found that ''the problem of overcrowding at Ketziot must be solved.'' The judges wrote: ''The prohibition on gathering of detainees in large numbers outside the tents results in the detainees' staying in the tents during most hours of the day. This is also the place where they receive their meals and hold their prayers. For this reason the overcrowding has even more serious significance.'' The Defense Ministry later carried out the court's recommendation that an advisory committee headed by a military judge and including experts in medicine and prison administration be created to insure ''constant supervision and proper follow-up'' of conditions at Ketziot. Still, the number of prisoners has not been significantly reduced. The Lawyers Committee study calls for an immediate halt to the transfer of detainees from the occupied territories to Ketziot and ''strongly urges that the detention of Palestinians at Ketziot be discontinued.'' A copy of the report may be obtained for $9 from the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, 330 Seventh Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001."
