"A two-year-old covert policy to destabilize Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi with United States-trained Libyan commandos has ended in failure, with Washington going to great lengths to find a safe place of exile for hundreds of dissident Libyan fighters it once supported and trained, United States officials said. The secret paramilitary program, set in motion in the final months of the Reagan Administration, provided military aid and training to 600 former Libyan soldiers at a base outside Ndjamena, the capital of Chad. The Libyans, who had been captured during border fighting between Libya and Chad in 1988, volunteered for the force in exchange for their freedom from prisoner of war camps. Incomplete details of the operation first came to light when the Government of Chad fell last December to a Libyan-sponsored guerrilla force, and the commando band was forced into an uncertain floating exile. Since then, Administration officials have begun to describe how they first ushered the dissidents to Zaire, and after their welcome there wore thin, then transferred most of the Libyans to Kenya. Showing Gratitude A State Department spokesman originally linked the release of $5 million in military aid to Kenya last month to an improvement in its human rights record. But now senior Administration officials admit that the money was granted as an expression of gratitude for granting 350 of the Libyans temporary refuge. The other 250 Libyans had by that time decided to return to their country. ""We compromised our human rights policy in Kenya somewhat,"" said a senior State Department official, ""but we felt we had little choice. We feel a humanitarian responsibility for these people."" The Libyan commandos were disarmed in Chad before their transfer to Zaire and have been permanently disbanded, Administration officials said. Now refugees, most of the dissidents have remained afraid of returning to Libya, and other countries are unwilling to take them permanently for fear of angering Mr. Qaddafi, who has demanded their return. 'Hot Potatoes' ""They are hot potatoes,"" said a Defense Department official. ""Everything has gone to hell in a hand basket, and we got stuck holding the basket."" President Reagan never concealed his animosity toward Mr. Qaddafi, whom he accused of sponsoring terrorism throughout the world. After he publicly linked the Libyan leader to the bombing of a West Berlin discotheque in which an American serviceman was killed in 1986, Mr. Reagan authorized a bombing attack on Tripoli. The raid seemed to quiet Mr. Qaddafi's adventurism, but by mid-1988 Reagan Administration officials were again accusing him of involvement in a number of terrorist acts, including the bombing of a U.S.O. club in Naples. When Chadian forces under President Hissen Habre handed Mr. Qaddafi an embarrassing defeat, the Reagan Administration seized the opportunity to use the prisoners of war taken by Chad to form an anti-Qaddafi paramilitary force. United States officials said many if not most of the captured Libyan troops were eager to fight against their former commander, and the Libyans made contact with established exiled dissident groups. Not Much Fighting Nevertheless, Administration officials said the force never launched a serious military operation, and may not have seen any combat at all despite training by Defense Department and intelligence advisers who supplied the force with small arms. Officials would not disclose how much money was spent on the program or its specific objectives. But they indicated that the cost was relatively small, and suggested that Washington never designed a fully detailed plan of how to use the commandos. An Administration official who monitors Africa said President Bush either did not fully believe in the program, or for a time was waiting for the right moment to launch the commandos. ""We waited beyond their period of usefulness and let ourselves get trapped,"" said the official, suggesting that the force should have been used before the Libyan-backed rebels had a chance to take power in Chad. ""We handed Qaddafi a propaganda victory."" While the Administration has published reports accusing the Libyans of involvement in terrorist acts in the Middle East, the Caribbean and North Africa, President Bush's criticism of Mr. Qaddafi has been muted compared with that by his predecessor. A Demand From Qaddafi Within hours of the Dec. 2 takeover of Chad by the rebel leader, Gen. Idris Deby, Mr. Qaddafi demanded that the 600 commandos be returned to Libya. Seeing Libyan military supply planes arrive in Ndjamena, the commandos prepared to defend themselves, a State Department official said. Although General Deby came to power with arms and supplies from Libya, he wanted to avert a fight between Libyans in his country. He also wished to assert his independence from Mr. Qaddafi, Administration officials speculated, in order to establish a working relationship with the United States. The newly installed President Deby consulted the American Ambassador, Richard Bogosian, and agreed to allow a number of United States Air Force C-141 transport planes to land in Ndjamena and pick up the Libyan dissidents, the State Department official said. The official said that when the planes landed, Mr. Qaddafi bitterly accused the United States of kidnapping the Libyans and executing those who would not agree to go. Seeking a New Home At the time, news reports based on assertions by American diplomats said the United States was disarming the Libyans and scattering them around Africa. In fact, Administration officials now say, Washington had found them a home on an army base in Zaire, a country whose Government has long facilitated covert activities of the Central Intelligence Agency. But Zaire's President, Mobutu Sese Seko, proved less helpful than expected. The month before, an Administration request for $4 million in military aid to Zaire had been denied by Congress amid concern over human rights abuses and corruption under President Mobutu. Apparently smarting from this, the Zairian leader indicated that he was now less enthusiastic about helping Washington. Mr. Mobutu bowed to a request by Mr. Qaddafi that Libyan Government officials be given access to the dissident refugees, so that those who wished to return home could do so. Administration officials said they believe some of the Libyan officials were intelligence agents who might have threatened the refugees and their families. About 250 agreed to return to Libya, and Administration officials said they do not know what has happened to them since. Interest From Kenya Fearing for their safety, the Administration looked for a new home for the refugees. Kenya expressed interest in taking them temporarily. Nairobi has a long record of harboring refugees. Like Chad's new Government, it also wanted to improve relations with the United States; in Kenya's case, the relations had deteriorated over the issues of human rights and corruption. Last year, the Administration froze $9.6 million in military aid to Kenya, calling on President Daniel arap Moi to release political prisoners, restore an independent judiciary and allow for freedom of speech. Shortly after Mr. Moi permitted the United States to airlift the 350 remaining Libyan refugees to his country, the State Department announced that the Kenyan Government had made progress in human rights, and Washington released more than half of the frozen military aid. Since then, an Administration official said, the human rights situation has not improved. ""They keep arresting people,"" she said. The United States has asked the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to help find the Libyans permanent refuge."
