"Ilhan Erdost, a well-known, 36-year-old leftist publisher, was taken into custody here on Nov. 5, reportedly because outlawed Marxist books had been found in his possession. On Nov. 11, the Ankara martial law command announced that Mr. Erdost died from blows inflicted by one of his guards. Mr. Erdost's death has stirred concern in Turkey, not only among intellectuals but also among the military leaders who toppled the civilian Government last September with the announced goal of restoring law and order. The handling of the Erdost case and a number of similar incidents indicates that the generals, who have shown firm impartiality in their efforts against terrorists of both the left and the right, are taking action against another form of terror: torture by the security forces. Nine enlisted men, including a noncommissioned officer, have been arrested in connection with Mr. Erdost's death, and an inquiry is under way. Similar investigations are taking place in at least seven other cases involving prisoners who died while in custody since September. Last June, the London-based human rights organization, Amnesty International, reported that 10 people had died in Turkey after being tortured in the first six months of the year and that torture was ''widespread and systematic'' in the country. There were signs of consternation in the conservative Justice Party government in power at the time but it was powerless to challenge the security apparatus. 80 Percent Drop in Violence The martial law commands set up after the September coup have full powers to crush political terrorism. Their strong measures have produced results: there has been an 80 percent decrease in violent incidents since the military takeover. Nevertheless, there have been abuses as the all-powerful security officials carry out what they perceive to be their duty in fighting terrorism. On Nov. 11, the Ankara martial law command reported two deaths ''under suspect circumstances'' at the Mamak Military Prison. It said arrests were made and investigations were being carried out by the martial law prosecutor. One of the victims was Bekir Bag, who allegedly confessed to killing four people for ideological reasons. He was said to have ''commited suicide'' by hanging himself with a bedsheet in his cell. A Cerebral Hemorrhage The other victim, Mr. Erdost, was the owner of Onu Publications. An official statement said that he died of a cerebral hemorrhage from a blow on the head by a military guard while he was being taken to the prison. The autopsy report, signed by three medical experts, also reported wounds on his face and left ear, marks of blows on his back of the shoulders, both thighs and right leg, and seven broken ribs. Mr. Erdost and his brother, Muzaffer, also a publisher, were detained on Nov. 5 for possession of illegal books, according to sources close to the family. Only one book was seized in Ilhan Erdost's home -a work by Engels that his company had published. The police seized a copy of the same book at his brother's home as well as a book by Lenin and one by Stalin. The two brothers spent two nights in a police station under surveillance and without incident, according to the same sources. Kicked and Beaten On the evening of Nov. 7, they were taken in a prison van to their cell in the Mamak Military Prison. During the ride, which lasted about half an hour, the two brothers were repeatedly kicked and beaten with sticks by four soldiers, according to an account related to friends by Muzaffer. They were also beaten when they got out of the van and again at the entrance of the prison. Ilhan fell down twice before they reached the cell, according to his brother. Muzaffer recalled that in the prison dormitory, Ilhan's eyes were red and his face was bleeding. Ilhan said that he was going to vomit and then fell to his knees. The other prisoners helped him onto the bed. When he appeared to have fainted, one of the prisoners, a medical student, gave him artificial respiration to no avail. Half an hour la ter, Ilhan was taken away in an ambula nce, his mouth open, eyes half closed, already dead, according to his brother's account. Later, Muzaffer was asked to give a detailed report of the incident to the military prosecutor and to identify the guards who accompanied them. He was released on the evening of Nov. 11 in time to attend his brother's funeral. The independent Turkish newsweekly Yanki, which has openly supported the military rulers in their moves to wipe out terrorism and to restore governmental authority, is expected to publish a detailed report tomorrow on the eight cases of prisoners said to have died after torture since the military takeover. Electric Shocks on Fingers Although the two deaths in Mamak involved soldiers, the other cases listed by Yanki, which means ''Echo'' in Turkish, involved alleged abuses by the police. In addition, a Maoist journalist, Ilhan Surmeli, wrote a a letter to the head of the junta, Gen. Kenan Evren, describing in detail acts of torture that he and others allegedly suffered between Nov. 3 and 6. He said that he was given electric shocks on his fingers and legs until he could no longer stand, was beaten with a ''falaka'' stick until he fainted twice, and was made to stand blindfolded on one foot with his fingers against the wall for three and a half days. Although his captors claimed to be soldiers, Mr. Surmeli said he thought they were policemen and that he was being tortured in the police school behind the Ankara Security Department building."
