"To the Editor: Ahmet Ersoy's letter of Dec. 12 defends the military rulers of Turkey in the context of a Times editorial on human-rights violations. he military takeover of the Turkish Government was unavoidable in the face of division and terrorism that came from all directions. But as Mr. Ersoy sees it, return to civilian government is assured because of the respect which the military leaders maintain for the ''legacy of Kemal Ataturk,'' whereby ''Turkey will regain its welldeserved membership in the exclusive club of democratic nations as soon as possible.'' There can b e doubt, however, that simplistic dependence on the Ataturk legac y alone will bring true democracy or human rights for the non-Turks or even for the Turkish population. That legacy reachesback to the v iolent transitions that began in 1908 with the overthrowof the rule o f the Sultan in favor of the Committee of Union and Progress. Instead of promoting peace, however, the committee proceeded to plan the elimination of non-Turk minorities, especially the Armenians whose ancient homeland was now part of Turkey. There had been much concern among the Western powers on human-rights issues affecting Armenians, and the committee planned the solution of the ''Armenian question'' through systematic massacre and deportation. Over one and a half million people perished with that ''solution,'' and in the process the nation lost its most productive population.  With the end of that war, the Turkish Chamber of Deputies itself initiated courts martial to bring to trial those who had transformed the country into a ''gigantic slaughterhouse.'' But then the nationalism of Ataturk stepped in to renounce the courts martial and their decisions: Turkey would be for the Turk s, and the elimination of Armenians was to go on. Indeed, the Ataturk legacy denied that the massacres had ever taken place, or that the Armenians had ever existed in that homeland.  Turkish history books and schools still faithfully follow that ludicrous distortion. But the effects of such events and of the ''unfinished Turkish Nuremberg'' are not easily forgotten by the world or by the people who suffered. Turkey itself is still reaping the harvest in terrorism and in economic failure. As Marvine Howe noted in a news article last May 17, the Turk today is a product of violence that emerges from many conditions and many failings in governmental policies that go back to those decades. The results cannot be otherwise in a nation that lives by self-deception from the top down. In other words, there is need for more than simple return to civilian government. There is need for the present or a future government to take a step beyond the Ataturk legacy: to renounce self-deception and to face the historic realities for what they were. The present leaders and the young of the nation have no guilt relating to the massacres except as they refuse to admit to those realities. One can try to understand the massacres (without justifying them) as due in part at least to the general violence of that transition period. But there can be no justification for perpetuating a deception to the third and fourth generations. The Ataturk legacy brought Westernization in dress and in civilian government. There is need now for yet another step beyond the legacy. The step may well begin with an honest effort at dialogue to reduce the severe tensions that trouble the Armenian and Turkish peoples and that now pose problems for other nations as well. In due time dialogues could be fruitful in also resolving issues that affect the Greeks and the Kurds, eventually to make Turkey truly a respected and self-respecting democracy.  V. L. PARSEGIAN Troy, N.Y., Dec. 17, 1981"
