"More than 5,000 Palestinians have been held in Israeli detention centers since the beginning of their uprising 18 months ago, with no charges made against them and no trials conducted, Amnesty International said in a report yesterday. At least 1,100 people are now being held under administrative detention, or confinement without trial. The report says many of them live under unduly harsh conditions and in violation of human rights principles. Though most prisoners are subject to six-month terms, many have been detained repeatedly, the report said. The findings were derived from interviews conducted by Amnesty International investigators with Israeli and Palestinian lawyers and human rights advocates and with former prisoners. Emphasizing that no Israeli officials had yet seen the report, Barukh Binah, spokesman for the Consulate General of Israel in New York and for the Israel Mission to the United Nations, said: ''We have had a longtime disagreement with Amnesty International about the question of administrative detention. We think it is not illegal, even according to international conventions. And we provide detainees with a privilege not accorded in any other similar situation: the right to appeal in the Supreme Court of Justice. He said, ''Every item in an Amnesty International report is checked by the Ministry of Justice and that will be the case now.'' A legacy in Israel of the British mandate that governed the country until 1948, adminstrative detention is sanctioned under international law under special emergency conditions. In the occupied territories, its use has been accelerated since demonstrations began in December 1987, in which Palestinians have thrown rocks, firebombs and other items at Israeli soldiers and settlers. But the report says that many of those held were neither advocating nor practicing violence. Rarely, the report asserted, are individuals informed of the reason for arrest and in many cases they are offered no explanation until a hearing weeks or months later. In addition, legal counsel is sharply limited, by the distance between detention centers and Jerusalem and by restrictions cutting the time allowed with a lawyer to 15 minutes. The report said the majority of detainees are held at the Ketziot camp, in a remote area of the Negev. There, it says, they are housed in in rudimentary tents offering little protection from the weather, are given inadequate medical care and allowed limited family visits. In addition, there is seemingly arbitrary use of solitary confinment and ''repeated and possibly unjustified use of tear gas and firearms within the camp.'' As a result there have been several riots and a hunger strike and the Israeli High Court proposed that a committee headed by a military judge be formed to monitor conditions. As of April, no committee had been organized, the report said. Amnesty International recommended that all cases of administrative detention in Israel and the occupied territories be reviewed immmediately and that those held for nonviolent activities be unconditionally released. Others should be given the opportunity to challenge their detention - a right Israel says it already grants. Copies of the report may be obtained for $3 through the publications department of Amnesty International U.S.A., 322 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001."
