"Bombs are raining on Afghan civilians. Since January, heavy fighting has been spreading across Afghanistan as a militant fundamentalist Prime Minister and a former Communist general wage war with a fundamentalist President. This week, United Nations Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali will dispatch a newly appointed personal envoy to try to negotiate an end to the fighting. The peace effort is long overdue. In Kabul, the Afghan capital, there are house searches, roundups and rapes, many of them by former mujahedeen -- the ""holy warriors"" who fought the Soviet-backed Communist regime during the 1980's -- who are allied with one faction or the other. Militia fighters launch rockets behind a barricade of human corpses. A woman escapes her burning home, leaving behind the bodies of her husband and 4-year-old son. A man flees his devastated house where 15 family members died, victims of mortar shells. As they try in vain to reach the Pakistani border, his 8-month-old baby freezes to death. A fundamentalist commander throws 14 people from the roof of a mosque; they were praying incorrectly. Tens of thousands have fled Kabul for refugee camps in Pakistan. But since January, Pakistan has turned away truckloads of desperate, hungry and shell-shocked Afghans at the border, and they are now camped outside the city of Jalalabad on a harsh, dry and windy plateau near the Khyber Pass. Local Afghans trained by the United Nations are still removing thousands of land mines and unexploded shells from this desolate place. Five years after the last Russian troops left, there is still a war in Afghanistan. The human rights abuses are horrific. And unlike those in Sarajevo, they are not captured by television cameras. The Afghans have been victims of indiscriminate bombing, torture and mutilation. Restrictions on the rights of women and on freedom of association and expression are on the rise; so is religious intolerance.  And nearly 15 million land mines scattered throughout the country continue to maim and kill. Afghanistan's Prime Minister, Gulbaddin Hekmatyar, is an extremist and a dangerous opportunist who despises the West and for years has cracked the whip in the name of Allah. The United States, and other friends of Afghanistan, gave him that whip by arming the mujahedeen, his allies, during the 1980's. For the first time, Afghanistan is becoming fertile ground for the breeding and export of militant Islamic fundamentalism. It is the ideology of a desperate people, and the seeds of desperation are taking root. With the virtual breakdown of law and order, radical fundamentalist training camps have been flourishing. As well as negotiating a solution to the conflict, , the U.N.'s new envoy, needs to draw up a more complete long-term plan, including disarming irregular forces, creating a salaried Afghan army, stepping up operations to disarm the mines, building schools and hospitals and training Afghan human rights monitors. Eventually, the United Nations should also sponsor free elections. Afghans are victims of the games superpowers once played: their war was once our war, and collectively we bear responsibility. If something is not done to stop the killing, Afghanistan will only produce refugees, radical fundamentalists and terrorists. Then surely, some day, Afghanistan will again be our war."
