"A weeks-long hunger strike by hundreds of inmates, and the death of two of them last week, have rekindled longstanding complaints about human-rights abuses in Turkish prisons. The protest began with a relatively small group in early July, but it has steadily gained support, to a point where it now encompasses more than 2,000 inmates at 12 widely scattered prisons. They say they will not end their strike until the Turkish authorities ease harsh regulations imposed a year ago after 47 inmates, most of them anti-Government leftists, tunneled their way to freedom at prisons in Instambul and Kirsehir, southeast of Ankara. Discipline was further tightened two months ago, when two unfinished escape tunnels were found at another prison,, in Eskisehir, west of Ankara. Early this week, Justice Minister Oltan Sungurlu accepted most of the hunger strikers' demands, raising hopes for a settlement. But his refusal to yield on crucial points, continuing the stalemate. They include demands for more liberal visiting privileges and for permission to receive food packages from outside, which are now banned to make it harder to hold the kind of long hunger strike now underway. #72 Inmates Hospitalized Since the strike began, the health of many protesters has deteriorated. Two died last week as they and nearly 300 other fasting prisoners were transferred from Eskisehir to Aydin, 300 miles to the west. Government officials say that they died from dehydration, but the Turkish Human Rights Association and some opposition politicians insist that the two men were beaten. According to Turkish press reports, 72 inmates have been hospitalized after refusing to ingest anything but sugared water and salt, and 10 are in lift-threatening condition. Fifteen have accepted medical treatment, but no food, and the authorities reportedly are making no attempt to force-feed anyone. Nearly all the demonstrators are said to be left-wing political advocates or members of the outlawed Kurdish Labor Party, a separatist group responsible for repeated terrorist attacks against civilian and military targets in the largely Kurdish southeastern sector of the country. They represent about 3 percent of a prison population that exceeds 50,000, and are among 5,000 inmates regarded as political prisoners by the human-rights group. Assertions of Systematic Torture The hunger strike is not the first in Turkish jails. But deaths are unusual, and they underscore one of Turkey's bigger problems as it seeks to become a member of the European Community. Beyond the many economic handicaps that the country suffers, European diplomats say, it must also show that it measures up to Western civil-liberties standards if its membership application is to stand a chance. ''At the least, they must start living up to prison standards established by the United Nations and the Council of Europe,'' said Nevzat Helvaci, secretary general of the rights association. In interviews, Government officials have acknowledged that abuses exist, but they deny that brutality is systemic, and insist that they are making progress."
