"To the Editor: In ''Turkey Focuses on Its Image'' (Washington Talk page, Jan. 20) Sukru Elekdag, the Turkish Ambassador, paints modern-day Turkey as a country that is making ''remarkable progress'' in democracy and economic development. However, the November 1986 report of the U.S. Helsinki Watch Committee paints a very different image. The report focuses on Turkish shortcomings in complying with the human rights provisions of the Helsinki accords. Some of the findings: * Ilhan Selcuk, writer, and Okay Gonensin, editor of the daily Cumhuriyet, went to trial March 14 and face 2 1/2 to 10 years in prison. They were charged with exceeding the bounds of legitimate criticism by suggesting in an article published Jan. 2, 1986, that a large percentage of the population prefers the pre-1980 military coup Government to the present regime. * Books banned from university dormitories since December 1985 include Plato's ''Republic,'' all works of Maxim Gorky, some issues of Time magazine, the Bible in Turkish and works by James Joyce and David Hume. * The Turkish Constitution prohibits former politicians from participating in Turkish political life and from forming parties until 1992. * Professional organizations, institutions and trade unions are subject to particularly close scrutiny. Assemblies, conferences and theatrical performances are under police surveillance. Plainclothes police frequently attend meetings and videotape proceedings and audiences. * Though torture is outlawed by the Turkish penal code, reports of incidents in police detention centers and in prisons continue from Turkish journalists, members of parliament and lawyers, as well as from torture victims and their families. Ismail Besikci, a Turkish sociologist, is serving a third prison term for insisting that there are Kurds indigenous to Turkey. It is dangerous even to print the words ''Kurdish'' or ''Kurdistan.'' The Government refers to them as ''mountain Turks who have forgotten their language.'' Turkish Kurds are forbidden to speak their language or study their history. While economic reforms in Turkey are certainly welcome, reforms in human rights, minority rights and freedom of speech must also be forthcoming. ROSS VARTIAN Executive Director Armenian Assembly of America   Washington, Jan. 23, 1987"
