"To the Editor: Re ""America Arms Turkey's Repression"" (editorial, Oct. 17): At this critical time when the relevant conference committee in the United States Congress is preparing to debate foreign assistance to Turkey, you fail to mention that the ""$320 million in American credits"" to Turkey is not a handout but a loan issued at market rates that Turkey will repay in full with interest. The extension of such credits is a reflection of Turkish-American cooperation and serves the strategic interests of our respective nations. The State Department has never acknowledged that Turkey is using American weapons in its war against a Kurdish guerrilla group, as you state, because that is not the case. Turkey never has nor ever will bombard its own citizens. Furthermore, there is no ""war"" in Turkey; the Government, within the framework of law, is combating the terrorism perpetrated not by a romantic-sounding ""Kurdish guerrilla group,"" but by the vicious Marxist-Leninist Kurdish Workers' Party, or P.K.K. The United States Government recognizes the P.K.K. as a terrorist organization. The P.K.K. in no way represents Turkey's citizens of Kurdish descent, who enjoy full equal rights as well as the privileges of citizenship, including complete participation in the political system. Turkey's commitment to insuring the safety of all its citizens regardless of ethnic background carries over into our determination to protect the Kurds of northern Iraq. The allegations that there have been thousands of civilian casualties in Turkish raids against terrorist camps in northern Iraq directly contradict the findings of the international community. Turkey was praised for its restraint in its most recent military action. We work to promote political stabilization and economic development throughout our volatile region by generating a constructive spirit of cooperation and good will among our neighbors. We are not aiming to ""spread Islam,"" moderate or otherwise. NUZHET KANDEMIR Ambassador of Turkey to the U.S. Washington, Oct. 17, 1995"
