"To the Editor: One could read your Aug. 16 editorial from its headline: ''Suicidally Stubborn in Beirut.'' In summary, you ask Lebanese Christians to forsake their freedom and dignity by abandoning their resistance to the Syrians, to negotiate political reform with the Muslims with Syrian rocket launchers on their necks, and subject their will and future to the epitome of a terrorist state, which has terrorized the world and Lebanon for at least 15 years and brought the constitutional process in it to a halt. To label the Christians as stubborn and suicidal is a mild affront to their being the oldest (and indeed the last, after the Armenian genocide) bastion of free Christianity in the entire East. But to ask them to accept a Syrian role in their affairs without mentioning that the Syrian regime is nothing but the Alawite minority clan of President Hafez al-Assad oppressing the vast Sunni majority in Syria by all the means that a vulgar tyranny can muster, is cynical on your part and an insult to the fundamental rights of free individuals and nations. Particularly when the stakes in Lebanon, as you summarize them, are a simple redistribution of the three highest posts (president, prime minister and speaker), already shared among the three largest communities. Furthermore, you obviously have not read any of the public statements by Christian leaders when you say that the objective of the Christians is to draw the West to their rescue. Their recent experience with Western and Israeli ''help'' has taught them to expect nothing but impotence and ineptitude, if not sheer betrayal. The Christians have endured persecution for the last millennium and a half, using their own resources in battle, as well as in politics. What Gen. Michel Aoun, and all of the Lebanese population, are asking is (1) a schedule for a gradual Syrian withdrawal from Lebanese territory and from internal Lebanese matters, and (2) for the West to come to terms with its long-held claims and convictions of moral responsibility in the face of terrorism and totalitarianism. Five months into the slaughter, the State Department issued the first public condemnation of Syria's brutality in Lebanon (genocide as the Pope put it). It is understandable that the United States does not wish to denounce known terrorists such as Hafez al-Assad, in the hope of one day recovering American hostages. But to denounce the Lebanese for attempting to salvage their nation, being held hostage by the same terrorists, is indecent and barbaric. Finally, you fail to cite your sources when you state that the Christians make up ''not much more than a third of the population.'' That many are not aligned with the Maronites is also vague on actual numbers, but is evidence that the Christians are not the monolith you want to portray. They may be outnumbered by the higher Muslim birthrate and the influx of Palestinian refugees, but you fail to tell that the Palestinian-Islamic-Syrian onslaught has emptied Lebanon of most of its Christians by 15 years of massacres, shellings, kidnappings, car bombings and other refined means of modern ''peacekeeping.'' If the demographics of Lebanon are to be the basis for a new formula of power sharing, a census should be taken after a Syrian withdrawal under United Nations supervision and after allowing the Lebanese exiles and refugees to return. We often read in your pages that Israeli Jews are becoming outnumbered by the growing Palestinian Muslim population. Had your editorial been called ''Suicidally Stubborn in Jersusalem,'' would you advise the Israelis to disband their country and ask the Syrian Army to keep the peace until a political settlement is reached? This would lead to a massive Jewish exodus, opening the way for the Palestinian refugees in Lebanon to return to Palestine, thus contributing to restoring peace in Lebanon. YOUSSEF HITTI Milwaukee, Aug. 19, 1989"
