"The Senate spent hours today locked in an unusual debate over honoring the countless Armenians who died early in the century at the hands of the Ottoman Turks, a debate that has pitted some of the Senate's most powerful figures against each other and unleashed a frenzy of lobbying. It was the second day that the Senate has considered the resolution, which is being sponsored by Senator Bob Dole of Kansas, the Republican leader. Theleader of the opposition is Robert C. Byrd, a West Virginia Democrat who has made a series of emotional pleas not to have Turkey condemned. Though estimates of the toll vary, historians agree that vast numbers of Armenian civilians died at the hands of the Ottoman Turks during World War I, through forced resettlement, starvation and shooting. The resolution would officially designate April 24 as a day of remembrance of the ''Armenian Genocide of 1915-1923.'' The core of the debate is over the use of the word ''genocide.'' Turkey has termed the use offensive, and the measure's Senate opponents say that passage of the resolution could harm Turkish-American ties. ''Genocide is genocide, whoever it may happen to, whatever race,'' Mr. Dole said. Crossing Party Lines Divisions over the resolution have obliterated traditional partisan and ideological lines in the Senate, making allies of such unlikely colleagues as Senator Carl Levin, a liberal Democrat from Michigan, and Senator Jesse Helms, a Republican conservative from North Carolina, both of whom support the measure. Mr. Dole's resolution has touched off a fierce lobbying struggle that features the Turkish Government, Armenian groups, American companies that do business in Turkey, historians and former officials of the Reagan Administration. There were accusations, later denied, that the Israeli Embassy is urging American Jewish groups to oppose the resolution. Turkey and Egypt are the only Muslim countries to have diplomatic relations with Israel. As a candidate in 1988, President Bush said the United States should acknowledge the ''attempted genocide of the Armenian people'' and pledged that his Administration ''would never allow political pressure to prevent our denunciation of crimes against humanity.'' But the Administration says that as written, the resolution offends the Turks and has worked to keep it from coming to a vote on the Senate floor. After weeks of meetings with Mr. Dole, White House officials have suggested compromise language that Mr. Dole says he is prepared to accecpt. But the Turkish Government will not accept the compromise, in part because the word genocide would still be used. Turks have complained that the word reinforces a common - and, they insist, mistaken - view that Turks rank among the great butchers of the 20th century. Other Groups Have Acted Similar commemorative proclamations labeling the killings as genocide have been adopted over the last few years by the European Parliament and the United Nations Human Rights Commission. The Holocaust Memorial Council has recognized and decided to include the Armenian killings in the Holocaust Memorial Museum now under construction in Washington. ''How long do we wait for history to make a judgment about what happened from 1915 to 1923?'' Mr. Dole asked his colleagues during floor debate. ''We decided there was a genocide in Germany even before its last potential victims were liberated,'' he said today. ''We decided there was a genocide in Cambodia even as the genocide was taking place. And it is high time we acknowledge a genocide which occurred in the Ottoman Empire before the fact of its occurrence is lost to history.'' But the Kansas senator faces formidable opposition from lawmakers such as Senator Byrd and Senator Sam Nunn, the Georgia Democrat who heads the Armed Services Committee and who argues that vital American security interests would be threatened if a resolution offensive to Turkey is approved. Noting that Turkey provides important NATO and American military bases as well as an important intelligence listening post, Mr. Nunn warned that the resolution would only inflame passions in a tense part of the world. ''If we pass this resolution as written,'' he said, ''we will harm U.S.-Turkish relations, we will weaken the southern flank of NATO and undermine our military capabilities in an area of the globe where we have vital interests.'' A Series of Votes Mr. Byrd has mounted a filibuster to prevent formal consideration of the measure, and a vote to shut off debate on that procedural point is to take place on Thursday. But even if Mr. Dole can muster the 60 votes to end the procedural debate, the issue will by no means be settled. Mr. Byrd is prepared to continue his filibuster on the resolution itself, and several more votes to force an end to the debate would be required. The prolonged preliminaries to a final vote have already taken their toll. Senator Dole, who originally had 60 co-sponsors for the resolution, now has only 46. As he watched his support erode, Mr. Dole lashed out at colleagues who have been vocal in criticizing human rights abuses in China, noting that as recently as this morning, the Senate Majority Leader, George Mitchell of Maine, had delivered an impassioned floor speech chastizing the Bush Administration for not taking a harder line against the Chinese. Mr. Mitchell has not yet taken a position on the Dole resolution. ''We have one set of rules for China, one set of rules for Turkey and another for some in the Middle East,'' Mr. Dole said. He also complained that senators and lobbyists who had been strong supporters of the international treaty on genocide approved by the Senate in 1986 were unwilling to step forward on the Armenian issue. Reluctance to Take Sides Mr. Byrd, who claims credit for helping to win passage of the laws that implemented the genocide treaty in 1988, said the question of genocide in the Armenian case was one for historians, not the Senate. ''This resolution asks the United States Senate to endorse a particular view of these events and to take sides in a historical debate,'' he said. ''The effect of our judgment could well be to damage the stability of democracy in Turkey and to damage United States relations with Turkey,'' he continued. ''Our actions on the Senate floor could fan the flames of the politics of yesteryear in the tinderbox known as the Balkans and in the Caucasus at a singularly inappropriate time when old ethnic passions have ignited.''"
