"When Iraq's powerful, modern army wages high-tech war against overmatched Kurdish guerrillas, killing and uprooting innocent civilian populations, Americans know what to call it. Ugly repression, verging perhaps on genocide. What then should Americans think when Turkish forces attack Kurds in southeastern Turkey? Or when Turkish planes bomb Iraqi Kurdish areas, as they have at least five times in the past month? The American response has been muted, for understandable reasons. Turkey has a democratically elected Government. It is a NATO ally and a valued member of the coalition against Saddam Hussein. And it faces an armed Kurdish guerrilla movement operating out of sanctuaries in Iraq and Syria. But none of this justifies Turkey's ugly repression against Kurdish civilians. In Turkey as in Iraq, an abused people desperately needs the international community to demand restraint. The Kurds, a non-Arab people related to the Iranians, briefly enjoyed recognition as a separate nation after World War I, when the defeated Ottoman Empire was subdivided by the victorious Allies. But under pressure from Turkey, provisions for an independent Kurdistan were abandoned. Instead the 20 million Kurds became a persecuted minority scattered under several flags. More than 10 million live in Turkey, about 4 million each in Iran and Iraq, the remainder in Syria and the nearby republics of the former Soviet Union. The Kurds have suffered most in Iraq, where outsiders -- including the U.S. -- have used them repeatedly as strategic pawns, then abandoned them to Baghdad's cruel revenge. They've been driven from their villages, intentionally starved, fired on from the air and the ground, even massacred with poison gas. Now, in blatant violation of last year's Security Council resolution, the Iraqi Army again advances on Kurdish lines. Turkey's huge Kurdish population has fared better by comparison, but its situation is deteriorating rapidly. Turkish Kurds have been subject to systematic human rights violations, including torture. And now they're caught between military and guerrilla fire. In both countries, Kurds are in acute danger. The international community is not required to support separatist demands for a Kurdish state. But it is morally bound to demand that both Baghdad and Ankara cease their ugly repression of Kurdish civilians before it becomes genocide."
