"To the Editor: ''U.N. Human Rights Group Faces a Key Test'' (news story, March 7) cites ''Western diplomats'' as seeking United Nations Commission on Human Rights scrutiny of Cuba to ''get the commission working in a less political manner.'' This comment, reflecting State Department views, ignores the substantial role the United States has played in politicizing United Nations human rights work. In the last three years, the United States delegation to the United Nations Commission has been fixated on rights abuses in Cuba, to the virtual exclusion of other equally deserving candidates for scrutiny. Headed most recently by the former Cuban political prisoner Armando Valladares -a non-English-speaking resident of Spain who was made a United States citizen to spearhead the United Nations effort - the United States delegation ceaselessly decried rights violations in Cuba, while expending little or no energy on ''friendly'' governments with records of serious abuses such as El Salvador, Guatemala, Chile and Haiti. The United States has even worked to weaken United Nations scrutiny of such allies by opposing or watering down critical resolutions. Rights practices in Cuba are certainly worthy of United Nations attention. But to justify selective focus on Cuba, the United States has portrayed Cuban abuses as far worse than they are, attempting to cast them in the same light as the political violence that has plagued much of Central America. A State Department report on Cuba issued shortly before the 1988 United Nations session cited torture, disappearances and summary executions - charges that independent human rights groups have found no evidence to support. Though this year's State Department report abandoned these charges, the United Nations debate on Cuba was diverted from the serious restrictions on due process and civil liberties that persist and should have been the focus of United Nations concern. Yes, the work of the United Nations Human Rights Commission could be less politicized. Its failure this year to examine grave abuses in Iraq, for example, illustrates a lack of evenhandedness. But it is misleading to portray the United States as the champion of impartiality when its own participation on the commission has been so politically charged. Rather than berating the United Nations for lack of political balance, the United States would do better to set an example by accurately reporting and consistently condemning gross rights violations by governments of all political stripes. KENNETH ROTH   New York, March 10, 1989 The writer is deputy director of Human Rights Watch."
