"To the Editor: Your report that the United States says Iraq is still violating United Nations terms for the lifting of sanctions (news article, Aug. 4) disclosed that Madeleine K. Albright, United States delegate to the United Nations, told a Senate Foreign Relations subcommittee that sanctions must continue against Iraq in part because Baghdad has failed to stop repressing the Kurds. If Amnesty International's February 1995 report is to be believed, for the past three years the majority of human rights abuses against Iraqi Kurds are committed by Kurds, namely the Kurdistan Democratic Party and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, the ruling Iraqi Kurdish parties legitimized by the West with elections held in May 1992. There was no run-off between the two rivals. Nor did United States officials or human rights organizations demand one. The power struggle was inevitable. Unsubstantiated claims that Saddam Hussein is behind virtually every incident, when local vendettas and the power struggle between Massoud Barzani and Jalal Talabani account for most, are simply accepted. And with reason. On the one hand, sympathy attaches to Iraqi Kurds since the Persian Gulf war. On the other, the United States benefits from these allegations. Kurdish factions and unnamed Middle East ""experts"" habitually warn of threats from Baghdad, explaining to the press that Saddam Hussein is convinced that attacking the Kurdish north will encourage the United Nations to lift the embargo. But no one knows better than Saddam Hussein that any such actions would simply give the United States the ammunition it needs to get the United Nations to prolong sanctions. Strategically situated between far larger Kurdish populations on both borders, Iraqi Kurdistan has been transformed into a Western base from which to help Turkey and undermine Iran. Iraqi Kurdish leaders aid and abet Ankara's war against the Kurdistan Workers Party, their Kurdish kin from Turkey. They support the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Iran against Teheran. The embargo keeps Iraq flattened while this larger agenda proceeds. With no dictator in the south, the United States and its allies would be without a pretext for residence in the north. VERA BEAUDIN SAEEDPOUR Director, Center for Research The Kurdish Library Brooklyn, Aug. 4, 1995"
