"The Iranian authorities have executed hundreds and perhaps thousands of people since June in the largest wave of political executions in Iran since 1980, Amnesty International charged today. A report by the human rights organization said about 300 executions had been confirmed. The actual number is probably in the thousands, with executions continuing, it said. Those put to death include supporters of Kurdish groups, members of opposition forces such as the People's Mujahedeen, which fought alongside Iraq's army, and those of other left-wing groups. At least 11 religious leaders associated with Ayatollah Hussein Ali Montazeri, the man designated to succeed Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini as Iran's spiritual leader, have been executed as part of power struggles between political factions, the report said. The executions mark the most violent political crackdown in Iran since thousands of prisoners were put to death in 1980, in the year or so after the Iranian revolution, Amnesty International reported. ''The evidence for mass executions is now indisputable, with evidence coming from many sources including relatives of executed prisoners and recent statements by the authorities themselves,'' the report said. The human rights group links the current wave of killings to the penetration into Iranian territory in July by Iraqi forces, a month before a cease-fire between Iran and Iraq took hold. The Iranian authorities have reportedly hung dozens of suspected Mujahedeen supporters in retaliation for battlefield setbacks. At the same time, visits to political prisoners were banned and hundreds of political prisoners disappeared, the report said. One woman told Amnesty International officials that she had dug up the body of an executed man with her bare hands while searching in a cemetery for her husband, who disappeared from Evin Prison near Teheran in August. She later found her husband's body, and cemetery officials confirmed that he had been executed over allegations of Communist sympathies. ''Groups of bodies - some clothed, some in shrouds - had been buried in unmarked shallow graves in the section of the cemetery reserved for executed leftist political prisoners,'' the report quoted the woman as saying. President Ali Khamenei said in a radio broadcast earlier this month that Mujahedeen supporters ''are condemned to death and we will execute them,'' the report stated. Copies of the report may be obtained from Amnesty International, 322 Eighth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10001."
