"It is odd to observe in these early months of a new Administration the ferocity of debate between some Carter and Reagan partisans on the subject of human rights as a component of foreign policy. The argument is centered on accusations that President Carter moralized to such an extent that his approach lacked all semblance of reality while the Reagan team, in pursuit of a tough stand toward our adversaries, will cotton up to the most repressive of regimes willing to back us with expressions of friendship and loyalty. The issue cannot be dealt with in such simplistic terms. No President could choose to ignore gross violations of human rights by any country with which we deal, for several reasons. First, there is an active constituency cutting across many lines that is unwilling to tolerate such flagrant violations of basic rights by other governments, and these groups, whether lay or church, find an interested public ready to be exercised on the subject. Second, and in large part in response to these constituencies, Congress, in the mid-70's and over the objection of President Gerald R. Ford, enacted a body of law that prohibits the granting of military aid or even sale of military equipment to governments that follow a consistent pattern of gross violations of certain internationally recognized rights by commission of acts of murder, torture, prolonged imprisonment without trial, and other serious deprivations of liberty. This prohibition may be waived only in extraordinary circumstances certified by the President as essential to national interest. On an ad hoc basis, Congress has also placed yearly ceilings on military aid to specific countries following unacceptable events of brutality or repression, such as have occurred in South Korea, Uruguay, Chile, Argentina, Brazil, South Africa, to name but a few. Nor can bilateral development aid be given unless it can be shown that it is directly beneficial to needy persons in the receiving country - an easier standard than in the case of military aid. Each year, a State Department human rights survey on a country-bycountry basis is required by law. These reports are public documents, and in some cases have caused major problems for our bilateral relations. Whether President Reagan will seek to amend this reporting requirement as unhelpful, and whether Congress would agree to its repeal, remains to be seen. As part of making policy toward any country, debate must center on the degree of unacceptable conduct by any government and must always be balanced in each case against other compelling United States interests. For example, Iran's treatment of the human rights of its citizens violates acceptable norms of conduct, and we remain outraged over the hostage affair. Yet the United States cannot afford to isolate Iran lest it drift into the Soviet orbit. Should our policy then be weighted on the value-judgment side of the scale or in favor of realistic rapprochment? Many who urge the playing down of human rights considerations have been the most outspoken against any dealings with Iran because its seizure and treatment of the 52 Americans was judged immoral. A realistic policy toward South Africa presents a dilemma. Its minerals and strategic location make it a natural ally of the West, yet its internal apartheid practices remain unacceptable. A strong argument can be made that we gain by welcoming it into the defensive strategy of the West while urging real internal change as the price of entry. Yet many, arguing that no dealings are acceptable until majority rule is established, surely would dispute this approach. There is no doubt that pressure on Argentina's Government, especially through the findings of the Inter-American Human Rights Commission, which the United States supported, resulted in a diminution of brutal practices, among them the disappearance of thousands of dissenters, whereas frontal criticism by Mr. Carter produced an angry backlash and Argentine refusal to support the grain embargo against the Soviet Union. These are the kinds of issues worthy of debate, for there are no easy answers in forging a nuanced policy toward authoritarian countries over which our influence is limited, or that we need as friends for one reason or another, or that we cannot afford to alienate beyond a certain safety point. The brutal excesses of any government with which we have active relations cannot be ignored, yet our ability to change their practices may be severely limited. Nor can we fail to weigh other considerations vital to a sound foreign policy that may compel us to deal with repugnant regimes. The issue is one of degree, of taking a position such that all these considerations will be reflected in proper proportion. It is not an all-ornothing proposition as is implied in the current debate over the issue. --------------------------------------------------------------------- Rita E. Hauser, an international lawyer active in Republican Party politics, was United States representative to the United Nations Commission on Human Rights from 1969 to 1972."
