"At his tumbledown, five-room home on the banks of the Tigris, Falah Fajer al-Mahathidi received an unexpected guest the other day, and, when the stranger had departed, he found himself the richer by a house, a job and roughly $6,000. The benefactor who sat with him for two and a half hours, complimented his 9-year-old daughter's doe-eyed beauty and shared jokes and chocolates with him was none other than President Saddam Hussein. The visit showed some of the ways in which the President is seeking to maintain power and persuade his people that he will survive in postwar Iraq after putting down revolts in March among the Shiite Muslims of the south and the Kurds of the north. ""He is my brother and my father,"" Mr. Mahathidi said, expressing adoration rather than claiming lineage. ""He's very nice."" 'The Fourth Degree' The assessment is not shared by those who have been tortured in his jails and suffered loss from his policies, or by those in Iran and Kuwait who have witnessed his invading armies as they came, saw and were defeated. Moreover, conversations with many Iraqis over the past 10 days have left the powerful impression that they feel vulnerable to repression and unsafe in a land whose human rights record is among the worst in the Middle East. ""There's something we call the fourth degree,"" said a middle-ranking civil servant who declined to give his name. ""That means that if I do something wrong, they'll punish my family, too, down to the fourth degree of cousins and so forth."" In Kirkuk, a northern Iraqi city where Government forces battled Kurdish separatist guerrillas in March, an Arab man ran up to a reporter and whispered: ""Everyone hates Saddam Hussein very, very, very much."" Another said: ""There are no human rights in Iraq."" Asked in what sense there were no human rights, he replied: ""In every sense."" Despite the authorities' protestations that Iraq is heading toward democratic reform, many seem cynically resigned to living under a Government rooted in the coterie of clan, family and loyalists that surrounds the President and extends deep into local administration. In Kirkuk, the local governor is a cousin of the President, Hashem Hassan al-Majid. The governor of Basra in the south is Latif Hammoud, a loyalist general whose office is decorated with photographs of the President pinning medals on him. On the highways in the north of the country, trucks towing artillery roll back from campaigns against Kurdish rebels, laden with unkempt Republican Guards who have been accused by relief officials of terrorizing civilians. ""The Kurds did not flee for nothing,"" said a relief official familiar with conditions in the north. Despite Baghdad's harsh tactics, Government officials insist that the country is heading for a new political order. Information Minister Hamed Yussef Hamadi said in an interview that before the end of this year ""there will be a timetable"" for a referendum on a new constitution and legislation providing for press freedoms and multiple political parties. An elected government would replace the supreme Revolutionary Command Council, which would be abolished. ""We are moving into a new phase,"" he said. ""This matter is serious and is not done in the aftermath of the Gulf war,"" he said, evoking the official argument that a process of political liberalization long predates Iraq's invasion of Kuwait. ""And it is irreversible,"" he said. ""We will not allow religious parties,"" he said. ""The reason is that the religious parties will work against the unity of Iraq."" Under the promised new system, however, Mr. Hamadi said he expected Kurdish, Iraqi nationalist and Communist parties to participate, ""especially when Communism has changed its ideology and face."" All parties would be obliged to name their members, and none would be permitted foreign funding, he said. Throughout the two-hour conversation, the official seemed to suggest that the ruling Baath Party members regarded themselves as the custodians and controllers, as much as participants, in the putative reform process. ""The Baath Party is not a small party and it has been in power for 23 years,"" he said. ""So let us say in fact that, because it has been in the political arena for such a long time, it will have some weight in the public life. You don't expect that the Baath Party will shrink to a very small group."" ""This country needs a strong leadership,"" he said. By some arguments, the promises of change by Government officals are supposed to bolster, not weaken that strength. ""They understand they must do something, and, looking at what happened in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union and the revolts in their own country, they calculate that it is better to do it from above, when they have control, rather than risk more uprisings,"" said a diplomat here, speaking in return for anonymity. ""But that does not mean Saddam wants to relinquish power. What they are talking about is a gradual, controlled process."" Thriving Personality Cult The unheralded visit by the Iraqi leader to Mr. Mahathidi's home in Baghdad's poor Souk Al Jadid area seemed designed to defy Western hopes, nurtured outside Iraq, that the dictator has somehow been cowed by his misadventure in Kuwait. The Iraqi leader seems intent on giving the impression that crippling economic sanctions and humiliating military defeat have left him unfazed. There has been ""no change in the way he presents himself. It's the same show,"" the Baghdad diplomat said. The war has, if anything, deepened the cult of personality around him. The officially run newspapers invariably carry his photograph prominently on the front page, and the number of oversize portraits across Iraq showing him confident and smiling, clad in anything from a field marshal's uniform to a boulevardier's white Panama, actually seems to have grown. ""For him, crisis is his life,"" a foreign specialist said. ""Since his childhood, he faced adversity but every time he found some way out, saving his face and prestige and maintaining his position. It's his life. He does not like to enjoy himself like some sheik, just sitting back without political adventures."" That seems part of the 54-year-old President's political profile and personal psychology. He came to power through the bloody, conspiratorial and secretive ways of the Baath Party. A year after formally assuming the presidency in 1979, he invaded Iran. When that war ended, in 1988, he challenged Syria's position in Lebanon by arming its Christian foes there. In May 1990, after threatening to ""burn half of Israel"" if attacked, he sought the Arab world's acknowledgement of his power at a conference of Arab leaders here. In August 1990, he invaded Kuwait. ""He has never lived without a crisis to legitimize the way he rules,"" a London-based Iraq specialist, Charles Tripp, said during the last and most disastrous war. President Hussein's surprise visit last week week to Mr. Mahathidi, moreover, seemed intended to show the Iraqi leader as a man in touch with and responsive to his people's worries. ""The President asked about the area, the families and the children. He asked how the prices were at the market and I told him they were very high, and all the people are poor,"" Mr. Mahathidi said. ""The President said the Government was studying how to lower the prices."" But the limits to the debate, not only in the modest courtyard by the Tigris, were evident. ""We did not talk about politics or the war,"" Mr. Mahathidi said. Neither did President Hussein seem to have eased the obsessive attention to his personal security that deepens the aura of inscrutability around him. No one in Mr. Mahathidi's neighborhood seemed to know that the President planned his apparently random visit. And even during his stay, his anxiety to avoid risk seemed to prevail over the dictates of Arab hospitality. ""He ate the chocolate I offered,"" Mr.Mahathidi said, ""but he wouldn't drink the water."""
