"Stung by reports of worsening human rights abuses in the areas it controls, the Palestinian Authority has announced an official inquiry into the death of a prisoner who was shot by a guard in the West Bank town of Jericho this week. The prisoner, Rashid Fityani, was at least the 10th to die in jails of the Palestinian security forces since they arrived in the West Bank and Gaza Strip more than two years ago. Mr. Fityani was arrested on Jan. 15, 1995, with his brother-in-law, Salman Jalayta, on suspicion of killing a member of Hamas, the militant Islamic movement, and cooperating with Israel. Mr. Jalayta died two days later, apparently as a result of torture. No autopsy report or investigation results were released by the authority. Mr. Fityani bore signs of violence when he was visited by his family about a month after his arrest. Human rights groups that investigated his case said he had been severely beaten with cables and clubs. Although he had been brought before a military court several times with other suspects in the killing of the Hamas member, the trial had been repeatedly postponed. On Tuesday, Mr. Fityani was shot dead by a guard in the Jericho jail. Reports from the local hospital said he had been hit by 13 bullets. Journalists in Jericho said the police had prevented them from taking pictures of his body. A statement by the Palestinian security forces in Jericho said Mr. Fityani and the guard had gotten into an argument that turned into a fistfight. ""During the fight,"" the statement said, ""Fityani, who was outside his prison cell, beat up the soldier, which led to the shooting and the death of Fityani. The Palestinian National Forces regrets such an unfortunate incident and will take the necessary legal measures against the soldier."" Palestinian officials said the guard had been jailed. Saeb Erakat, a minister in the Palestinian cabinet, condemned the killing and said Yasir Arafat, the president of the authority, had ordered an inquiry. ""This is a despicable crime,"" Mr. Erakat said. ""Whatever the prisoner's offense, the authority was responsible for his protection."" Rawiya Shawwa, a member of the Palestinian legislative council, said, ""Human rights abuses have become part of a method used by some members of the security apparatus."" The rights group Amnesty International urged the authority to make the findings of its investigation public, noting that results of previous inquiries have not been released. ""After the failure of so many commissions of inquiry into human rights abuses, only a speedy, full and public report of this commission's findings will allay fears of yet another cover-up,"" the group said in a statement. In a report issued earlier this week, Amnesty International accused the authority of widespread torture of prisoners, arbitrary political arrests and prolonged detention without trial of hundreds of suspected political opponents. These policies have created a climate of fear and intimidation, the group said."
