"Perhaps 10,000 political prisoners - or perhaps only 3,000 - may benefit from an amnesty to take effect tomorrow when Iran observes the 10th anniversary of its revolution. The uncertainty is typical of a chaotic, revolutionary society in which no one knows who's in charge of what, and in which the closest thing to decisive power is wielded by a joyless, glowering fanatic. So relentless is Ayatollah Khomeini's rage that when a radio talk show annoys him, those responsible are flogged (see box). This record cannot be ignored as Washington reconsiders ties with Iran. Ten years after the Shah's fall, families still flock to prison gates for crumbs of information about missing relatives. Nobody is sure how many people have been shot by firing squads and flung into mass graves since the eight-year Persian Gulf war ended last summer. But Amnesty International has gathered more than 1,000 names of political prisoners believed to have been killed, some for belonging to the armed resistance, others jailed years ago for such offenses as distributing leaflets. The crackdown on political dissenters has even moved the Soviet Union, normally silent on such matters, to express concern. Similar ferocity is applied to non-political offenders. Hundreds face execution under a new law fixing mandatory death sentences for possessing small amounts of hashish, opium, heroin, methadone and other drugs. Anyone arrested is liable to torture until a confession results; detention occurs without judicial supervision. The execution on Jan. 16 of 56 people for drug offenses thus provokes a shudder. In Iran, amputating four fingers on the right hand is a common punishment for theft and other crimes. Those not maimed or shot risk punishment if they are adherents of religions frowned upon by the ruling mullahs, like the Bahai faith. Though the worst repression against them has abated, Bahais are still denied the right to organize, own property and conduct religious schools. These are all appropriate matters for Washington to consider in debating renewed contacts with Iran. During the years of the Shah, to its cost, the U.S. appeared to shrug off human rights as a lesser matter. That mistake need not be repeated. In January, according to the Iranian news agency, Ayatollah Khomeini was deeply offended by a radio interview in which a woman said she could not accept the prophet Mohammed's daughter as a role model. As a result, the broadcast director at the Teheran radio, Mohammad Arab Mazar-Yazdi, was sentenced to five years in jail. Three directors of the Teheran radio's Islamic ideology group were sentenced to four years each. All received 50 lashes. The court levying these penalties held that the broadcast ''notoriously misportrayed the ruling mentality of Iranian women.'' Had the insult been deliberate, said the Ayatollah, the person responsible would have been executed."
