"In what appears an important policy shift, Iran announced today that it was ready to cooperate with a United Nations investigation into allegations that it is responsible for widespread human rights violations. But in return, Iran is asking a General Assembly committee to tone down a draft resolution highly critical of its human rights record. Diplomats say the resolution is likely to win overwhelming support when the full General Assembly votes on it next month. Iran's United Nations representative, Mohammed Jaafar Mahallati, today told the General Assembly's Third Committee, which deals with social, humanitarian and cultural questions, that Iran would admit a United Nations human rights investigator and cooperate if the resolution is watered down. Diplomats said Iran's change in stand reflected the effect of public criticism by United Nations bodies. It is also a further indication of Iran's new willingness to cooperate in international forums. After a year of resisting a Security Council call for a cease-fire in its war with Iraq, Iran reversed itself over the summer. And on Thursday, Iran agreed to yield its longtime role as the second-largest producer in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries so the organization could reach agreement on output ceilings that is expected to raise prices significantly. At the United Nations today, Mr. Mahallati contended that since the ultimate purpose of the draft resolution was to force Iran to cooperate, the General Assembly could achieve its aim through a weak resolution that would result in Teheran's accepting the investigation. ''The committee has to choose between a confrontation or a cooperative approach,'' he said. The draft resolution is sponsored by a group of mainly Western countries including Australia, Britain, Canada, Belgium, the Netherlands and Norway. Diplomats said the Iranian offer created a tough political choice for those countries. Some want to stand firm, arguing that Iran is the only country that has consistently refused to cooperate with United Nations human rights investigations since it was first accused of violations in 1985. Other diplomats, however, see Iran's offer as a chance to strengthen respect for human rights in that country by sending in an inspector, who is known as a special rapporteur. The inspector would report to next year's meeting of the Human Rights Commission, so Iran will remain under surveillance. Today Mr. Mahallati said the administration of justice in Iran had been disrupted by its eight-year war with Iraq. But now that a cease-fire is in place, he implied that Iran is ready to pay more attention to its citizens' human rights. Mr. Mahallati also said Iran's decision to strike a more cooperative stance on human rights issues was influenced by what he termed the ''spirit of compromise and cooperation prevailing in the decision-making process of the United Nations.'' The draft resolution that Iran wants toned down is based on a report compiled by Raynaldo Galindo Pohl of El Salvador, the Special Rapporteur for Iran. Mr. Pohl accused Iran of serious human rights violations, including a wave of political executions last summer when Iraq got the upper hand in the war in the Persian Gulf. The report says several hundred people were hanged and shot, apparently because they were suspected of aiding or sympathizing with opponents. PARIS, Nov. 25 (Special to The New York Times) - The French Government confirmed today that Foreign Minister Roland Dumas will visit Teheran sometime next year. A spokesman for the Foreign Ministry said the date of the trip remained open, and added that negotiations during the visit would include ''many subjects,'' including relations and trade. The French thus confirmed a dispatch Thursday the Iranian press agency that said Mr. Dumas would soon become the first French Foreign Minister to visit since Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini assumed power."
