"A day after a Jewish settler was shot to death in the Gaza Strip, Israel said on Thursday night that it would expel from the occupied territories 12 Palestinians whom it accused of terrorist involvement. The action, taken by Defense Minister Moshe Arens, was apparently aimed at placating angry settlers who had put pressure on the Government to adopt stern anti-Arab measures after fatal ambush attacks on four of their number in the last 10 weeks. But the expulsion order created new uncertainties for the Middle East peace process, which is scheduled to resume in Washington on Tuesday with talks between Israel and delegations representing Syria, Lebanon, Jordan and the Palestinians. Palestine Liberation Organization officials said they had asked the Palestinian delegation to pull out of the Washington talks to protest the expulsions, The Associated Press reported. Farouk Kaddoumi, who heads the Tunis-based political department of the P.L.O., said in Amman, Jordan, that the P.L.O. was asking the delegation not to go to Washington. Palestinians involved in the talks said the delegates had not decided to withdraw. ""We have not pulled out of the talks,"" a spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation, Hanan Ashrawi, told Reuters. ""I deny media reports that we have."" Faisal al-Husseini, a Palestinian leader in East Jerusalem and a principal adviser to the Palestinian negotiating team, attacked the announced expulsions as ""a continuation of Israel's policy to destroy the peace process."" U.S. Credibility Questioned Although he stopped well short of threatening a Palestinian boycott of the Washington talks, Mr. Husseini said in an interview late Thursday night that he regarded the matter ""very seriously"" and felt that it raised ""a question mark about the credibility of the American peace plan and the credibility of the United States itself."" Since the start of the Palestinian uprising in December 1987, Israel has expelled 66 Arabs from the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, not including those covered by the order Thursday. The Israeli argument is that this is a necessary tactic to deal with people accused of inciting anti-Israeli attacks. But the deportation procedure has been strongly criticized by the United States and other Western nations as a violation of human rights conventions. There had been no expulsions since last May, and the start of the peace talks on Oct. 30 encouraged speculation that the policy might be abandoned. But a spurt of armed attacks on Jewish settlers has produced a sharp settler response, including attacks on Arab villages in the West Bank and an increasingly confrontational approach toward the Israeli Government and its armed forces, both of which have been accused of not doing enough to protect the 110,000 Jews living in the territories. In turn, this activity has touched off charges from some officials, including on occasion Mr. Arens, that the settlers were dangerously taking the law into their own hands. Settler Killed in Gaza But the pressure on the Government to act apparently became too great after the latest ambush, in which a 35-year-old settler, Doron Shorshan, was shot dead while driving near the Deir el Balah refugee camp in the Gaza Strip. Mr. Shorshan, the first settler killed in Gaza since the start of the anti-Israel uprising, was buried on Thursday in Holon, a Tel Aviv suburb. In a steady downpour, other settlers moved three mobile homes to the place where he was shot in an attempt to create a new community, but according to radio reports, Mr. Arens ordered that they be removed, at least for now. The Defense Minister had objected to a similar protest settlement that went up in the West Bank after two Israelis were shot dead there in October. But as settlers pressed their point, Mr. Arens relented, and the new community has received tentative approval and seems likely to become permanent. An Israeli Army spokesman, Lieut. Col. Moshe Fogel, said the 12 Palestinians ordered expelled represent ""one of the largest groups, no doubt about it,"" to be affected by this sort of action. In most instances, those deported have been sent to Lebanon, he said, adding, ""The law says that you can't send them where they may be endangered."" The 12 people were not identifed, but an army statement said they belonged to three factions of the Palestine Liberation Organization and to the Hamas movement of Islamic fundamentalists, who are particularly active in the Gaza Strip. ""Several of these persons were involved in terrorist activities, and others were involved in incitement,"" the statement said. Colonel Fogel said the Palestinians would be allowed to appeal the expulsion order to a military court and then also, if they choose, to the Israeli Supreme Court. It is rare, however, for the high court to interfere with military actions."
