"Polls now suggest that Israelis, who will vote this fall, favor the hard-line Likud bloc and Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, adamant foes of any trade of land for peace. But whatever the outcome, the Palestinian uprising in the West Bank and Gaza has fundamentally affected attitudes, even in Mr. Shamir's bloc. The assumption has been that the occupied territories might be pacified indefinitely without doing violence to Israel's principles. After six months of rebellion, and with more now promised by last week's Arab summit meeting, the election will test that assumption. And yet the next government, whether led by Likud or Labor, could face an even more determined and intractable Arab front. The Arab heads of state last week denied Yasir Arafat sole leadership of the uprising but joined with him in a new commitment to the Palestinians in the streets. And while they didn't reject the Shultz peace plan outright or insist on Palestinian statehood, they hardened their stance on the need for Israeli withdrawals from all occupied territories. Israel bears part of the blame for this intransigence. Its leaders did everything to discourage the emergence of moderate Palestinians with whom to talk. Palestinians are forbidden rudimentary civic rights, and it's hard for any to step forward when the penalty is jail or deportation. But Israel cannot be blamed for the destructive coyness of King Hussein, for the Palestine Liberation Organization's refusal to eliminate genocidal bluster from the organization's charter or for Palestinian rejection of Israel's legitimacy and permanence. Notably, Mikhail Gorbachev had to remind Yasir Arafat of Israel's valid security concerns and right to exist. As Israel's dovish former Foreign Minister, Abba Eban, has remarked, Palestinians never miss a chance to pass up an opportunity for peace. Israel can't be blamed because Palestinians spurned Security Council peace plans, boycotted the autonomy talks proposed in the Camp David accords or refused to meet with Secretary of State Shultz. Symbolic of this sterile rejectionism was Palestinian insistence that a literal wall be maintained between them and the Israelis who took part in a television debate moderated by ABC's Ted Koppel. Most morally disabling has been Palestinian justification of terror. The victims are not just Israeli schoolchildren but also Palestinians perceived as too moderate. Last week's grisly assault on an Israeli-appointed mayor of a West Bank town, and the silence that followed, is the uprising's dark side. This is not to overlook Israel's hard-fisted repression, but to complete the record. With reason, nothing so upsets Palestinians as the feeling that their very existence is denied by their oppressors. But responding as they do closes the circle of hate. West Bankers have been ill used by P.L.O. exiles and their let's-pretend declarations. Rejectionism is a formula for endless paralysis. Having shown their courage in defying occupying soldiers, is it impossible for Palestinians to take the harder step?"
