"Hundreds of children in Iraq have been imprisoned, tortured or executed in a Government campaign ''deliberately targeting the children of political opponents,'' Amnesty International said in a report released today. Many of the abuses that the human rights group alleged were aimed at Iraq's Kurdish population, but Iraqi Arab children have also been victims, it said. The report asserts that torture is used against children in Iraq to force them to disclose information about relatives. In some cases, the report said, children have been abused in front of their parents to persuade them to talk. Iraqi officials in Geneva had no immediate comment on the allegations. A Specific Account The report contains the account of a former political prisoner released in April 1985 after five months' detention, who said his family was tortured to force him to reveal his political affiliation. ''Mother, three sisters and three brothers with five children aged between 5 and 13 were arrested and brought in front of me'' he was quoted as saying. ''They were subjected to beatings on the soles of the feet and electric shocks.'' The same person was quoted as saying he saw a 5-month-old infant screaming after prison authorities denied it milk in an effort to force a confession from the infant's parents. The rights organization said many chilren have been jailed, including one named Mirza Rasho, who was 6 when he was jailed with his brother in 1985. Killings of Pupils Alleged The report says that government forces have carried out ''deliberate killings'' of children. ''Schoolchildren have been apprehended, lined up and summarily shot in public'' in Kurdistan, the rights organization charged. The report asserted that at the end of 1987, Iraqi authorities executed 17 people younger than 18, with the youngest 14. They were among as many as 360 Kurds from the province of Sulaimaniya who were said to have been executed in November and December of that year. In August 1983, 8,000 male members of the Barzani Kurdish community were seized and driven away in military vehicles, the report says. Among them were 315 children aged between 8 and 17. They have not been seen since."
