"To the Editor: United States Representatives Henry J. Hyde and Charles Wilson, in ''More, Not Less Aid to Afghan Rebels'' (Op-Ed, April 29), neglected to mention that the Afghan parties they are so keen to keep supplied with arms include those who have used United States assistance to commit serious human-rights abuses. Throughout the war, Pakistani military intelligence has funneled American arms to groups over which it can have the greatest influence - including those which have little respect for one right that Representatives Hyde and Wilson clearly cherish: the right of all Afghans to choose their own form of government. The group which has received the lion's share of U.S. aid, the Hezb-e Islami, headed by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, is believed responsible for the murders of Afghan intellectuals and relief workers in Pakistan, as well as for the torture and summary execution of rival mujahedeen prisoners. Hekmatyar's party is certainly not the only one to have committed such abuses, but U.S. condemnation has been rare, and efforts to reduce aid to Hekmatyar have been weak at best, duplicitous at worst. Mr. Hyde and Mr. Wilson also call for the ''strangulation'' of the cities as a way to ensure a mujahedeen victory. To date, the field strategy of some mujahedeen and Arab commanders has been to fire indiscriminately into cities, blowing to bits day-care centers and apartment buildings along with whatever strategic targets they happen to hit. For its part, the Afghan Government has fired more Scud missiles since November 1988 than were launched during the entire Iran-Iraq war, destroying populated villages and killing hundreds and perhaps thousands of civilians. The Afghan people have already paid far too great a price for this war. The last thing they need is for the United States to continue to arm those who have made use of our military aid to perpetrate abuses. Instead, the U.S. should call for an end to all such abuses and support efforts that will allow all Afghans to participate freely in determining their political future. PATRICIA GOSSMAN Research Associate, Asia Watch   Washington, May 15, 1990"
