"Across northern Iraq, Kurds, freed for now from the harshness of President Saddam Hussein's grip, have been uncovering mass graves, torture chambers, elaborate prison systems and documents from secret police files that attest to the inner workings of one of the region's harshest dictatorships. In the city of Sulaimaniya alone, local officials say they have unearthed more than 200 bodies in the last two months, and new sites to be excavated are being discovered every week. Kurds have long charged the Hussein Government with human rights abuses. Some especially severe cases have been independently substantiated and widely publicized, including attacks with chemical weapons on Kurdish villagers at Halabja during the war between Iran and Iraq. Relative Freedom But the graves and other recent discoveries offer evidence of the wide extent of Baghdad's repression. They are coming to light now that the Kurds have been left relatively free to run their affairs and rebuild their lives in the aftermath of the American-led military effort to protect them from Mr. Hussein's forces. Baghdad crushed a Kurdish uprising in the aftermath of its defeat in the Persian Gulf war, forcing hundreds of thousands of Kurds to flee for months into Iran and Turkey. ""When we first complained about these human rights violations the world did not listen,"" said Jalal Talabani, one of two top Kurdish guerrilla leaders. ""Now that we come forward with the evidence, this information is harder to ignore."" Indiscriminate Killing Charged Kurdish leaders contend that more than 180,000 people have disappeared in the last decade at the hands of the Iraqi secret police. They say the Iraqis killed anyone, including young children, who they believe supported the outlawed Kurdish guerrilla movement or who belonged to a family that had ties with the Kurdish rebels. [Diplomats at Iraq's mission to the United Nations, its highest-level diplomatic presence in the United States, could not be reached for comment on the new evidence of abuses. Middle East Watch, a New York-based human rights group, said it was planning to send investigators to northern Iraq to look into the Kurds' accusations.] When confronted in the past with charges of mass killings or abuses of Kurds, Iraqi officials have in general denied wrongdoing, saying that any actions in the region would have been carried out against inflitrators from Iran or against traitors. Iraqi officials have also pointed to at least one mass killing by Kurdish guerrillas in October, when 60 Iraqi soldiers who surrendered during skirmishes in the Sulaimaniya area were slain by their Kurdish captors, according to the account of a Reuters reporter. Kurdish leaders promised to investigate the killings and bring those guilty to justice, but the investigation has yet to produce any results. Of graves being uncovered in northern Iraq, some reflect vilagers' return only now to the ruins of communities destroyed under an Iraqi policy of forced mass relocation begun in 1976. More than 4,000 villages -- primarily those near the Turkish or Iranian borders that were regarded as sanctuaries for Kurdish rebels -- are believed to have been demolished under the program, which reached its peak of intensity in 1987 and 1988, toward the end of the Iran-Iraq war. Other mass graves are thought to be more recent. At one, on Kalowa Hill here in Sulaimaniya, Pershan Hassan clambered quickly up the dirt track leading to the site. As she hurried forward, she clutched to her chest a framed black and white picture of a young boy. At the top of the rise, a crowd that had gathered parted silently as she stumbled forward. 'By His Clothes' The 53-year-old woman suddenly stopped and let out a gasp of pain and recognition. Before her, nine years after he disappeared from a schoolyard, lay the skeletal remains of her 13-year-old son, Shafiq. A faded blue blindfold was tightly wrapped around his skull and spent bullets were scattered among his now dark brown bones. ""I know him by his clothes,"" she whispered, her voice breaking as she lifted the garments and kissed them. ""I raised him without a father."" The mass grave on Kalowa Hill is believed to hold the remains of dozens of people. ""Prisoners and collaborators who dug the mass graves tell us where they are located,"" said Aras Mohammed Garib, who is in charge of the digging around the city, ""but many have fled or are dead. It will be a long time before we really know the extent of all this."" Kurdish Zones The Kurdistan Front, umbrella group for eight Kurdish groups in northern Iraq, has domain over most of the area above the 36th parallel. The region, home to about three and a half million, is part of a security zone established in April by American forces. The Kurds also control territory below the zone, including the city of Sulaimaniya, although the Iraqis appear to be positioning themselves to take back it and other cities as autonomy talks with the Kurds have bogged down. In gathering evidence, Kurdish officials here each morning pore through stacks of documents that they said were seized from police files, including photographs and videotapes of torture and death. The long, typewritten lists chronicle killing after killing, sometimes for what seem to be trivial offenses. One man was sentenced to death because he had a picture of a rebel Kurdish leader in his wallet. The killing sites are often found a few feet from the mass graves, Kurds say. On Kalowa Hill, five tires filled with cement are all that remain of the spot where apparently many people were shot to death. Earthen embankments border the back and either side of the site. Prisoners, apparently blindfolded with their hands tied behind 10-foot metal poles, were planted in the cement and then shot. A picture taken from police files shows what appear to be three Iraqi officials squatting like big game hunters next to the slumped body of a man who was recently killed. One of the Iraqis, wearing a beret, is grins while holding a knife to the corpse's neck. Those who lived in the vicinity of Kalowa Hill said they often heard screams and volleys of shots, but were threatened with death if they tried to peer into the high-walled compound. ""The dogs used to come back with human bones, after getting inside the compound,"" said Yasin Khader Hassan, 25. ""Then the guards began to shoot even the dogs."" A Woman's Agony The hill now draws women looking for lost children or husbands. The plaintive cries of those who recover the remains of their loved ones rise above the murmur of the crowd. One woman, Bahia Khader, kneeled over the bones of her son Sirwan, who disappeared in 1982 when he was 15. ""Sirwan, Sirwan,"" she cried, swaying over the bones and bits of clothing of her child. ""By the hands of these criminals, you have been taken from me."" Those who survived life inside Iraqi detention centers describe torture, beatings, hunger and the severance of all contact with the outside world. Jamal Aziz Amin, a courtly 45-year-old headmaster, stood in a soundproof room in the darkened remains of Sulaimaniya's central security prison, where he spent a year in detention. Large hooks hang from the ceiling where Mr. Amin was suspended during torture. He was handcuffed behind his back, he said, and hoisted onto the hooks at the wrist. He said he was stripped, questioned about his ties to Kurdish guerrilla groups, and given electric shocks until he fell unconcious. Revenge Taken ""You would scream,"" he said, ""and it would sound as if you were yelling from the bottom of a deep, deep well."" The huge prison, its tiers of cells piled one on top of the other, stands bleak and deserted in the Baghdad suburb of Shorish. When it was attacked in March by Kurdish fighters and enraged civilians, 300 secret policemen and guards, including the warden, held out for three days. None of the defenders survived, Kurds say. Mr. Amin and his fellow prisoners, after the attack, had the rare experience of standing over the bodies of many of their torturers. ""We wanted them to all come back to life,"" he said, ""so we could kill them again."" At the prison, inmates subsisted on thin soup, bread and weak tea. Mr. Amin said that when he was released, he had lost 60 pounds. Prison Graffiti The walls of the cells, many marked with crudely drawn calendars, carry the messages of those who tried to leave some testament of their humanity, some record of their suffering. ""These were my friends, arrested with me,"" Ahmed Mohammed wrote, listing five names. ""All were executed."" Another prisoner had written a message to his mother: ""Oh, mother,"" in this dark room my dreams trouble me and I shake. Then comes the kicking against my door and a voice telling me to get up. It is time for my interrogation. I awake to the unconscious."" Mr. Amin wound his way to the crude latrine, a hole in the cement, at the end of a corridor of cells. ""I wanted to show you this,"" he said, a small shaft of light streaming in from a tiny, barred window 14 feet above him. ""Here is where we would come at night so we could pull ourselves up the walls to hear the sound of the dogs barking in the distance. To hear the dogs, this was everything for us."" WASHINGTON, Dec. 6 (Reuters) -- The United States expressed concern today at a renewed Kurdish refugee crisis in northern Iraq.  The State Department spokeswoman, Margaret D. Tutwiler, said: ""The United Nations people there on the ground tell us they believe they can handle this situation. It is something that is a concern to us, and something that we are obviously watching closely."" United Nations officials say about 200,000 Kurds have fled attacks by the Iraqi Army in northern Iraq in recent weeks, straining the resources of relief teams trying to help half a million uprooted people survive an icy winter. President Saddam Hussein crushed a Kurdish revolt in the aftermath of Iraq's defeat in the Persian Gulf war earlier this year. Up to two million refugees fled toward Turkey and Iran, and Western troops created safe havens in Iraq for their return. The West wants to avoid another mass refugee exodus. Map of Iraq showing location of Sulaimaniya. (pg. 7)"
