"To the Editor: According to your article on Iran's partial opening of its prisons to inspection (Dec. 11), Assadollah Lajevardi, chief of the prison system, said there are ""no more than eight political prisoners in Iran,"" and the ""treatment of prisoners is no longer disciplinary, but educational."" These claims are absurd as a description of imprisonment in Iran but contain a disturbing truth about Mr. Lajevardi's sense of reality. Evidence of Iran's human rights violations is overwhelming. According to Amnesty International, Iranians in 1993 witnessed ""mass arrests, unfair trials and summary executions."" What makes Mr. Lajevardi's words painfully ironic is his own background as a victim of human rights abuse. Before the 1979 revolution he spent nine years in Evin Prison and was severely tortured. In those years I worked to publicize his plight as a political prisoner. After the revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini made him director of Evin. In a pathological case of the tortured becoming the torturer, Mr. Lajevardi soon became notorious for brutal treatment of political inmates. He virtually lived in Evin the first three years of the revolution, when more than 5,000 political dissidents and nearly 200 members of the Bahai faith were executed. Ayatollah Khomeini elevated Mr. Lajevardi to be chief of the country's prison system. Mr. Lajevardi periodically invites reporters to his office and informs them of his concern for the spiritual need of the prisoners. His criterion of success in serving this need is the readiness of prisoners to confess crimes or repent for their sins. If torture is required to reach this end, then torture is a holy instrument, protecting the theocracy against the evil of dissent and cleansing the soul of the sinners. Mr. Lajevardi's background is rare among Iran's ruling clerics, but his approach to the spiritual well-being of political detainees exemplifies their attitude toward human rights. MANSOUR FARHANG Professor of Politics Bennington College Bennington, Vt., Dec. 14, 1994"
