"Defense lawyers in the trial of Klaus Barbie took the floor today and provoked an angry quarrel in the courtroom when they attacked Israel and other countries for committing ''crimes against humanity'' that, they argued, were ''more serious'' than those of Mr. Barbie himself. During the roughly four hours of speeches, the team of three defense lawyers all but ignored the charges that have been made against Mr. Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of this city, in the last eight weeks. Instead, as the trial entered its final phase today, the defense lawyers argued that a conviction of Mr. Barbie would be unjustified because, they contended, so many atrocities - often committed by Western countries -have taken place in the four decades since the end of World War II. The unorthodox defense had long been anticipated in a trial that has consisted of often dramatic testimony by survivors and other witnesses of Mr. Barbie's efforts to track down Jews and members of the Resistance and to have them deported to Nazi death camps. Mr. Barbie's main defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, known in this country for his defenses of accused terrorists, has been expected to contend that the West has hidden its own ''colonialist'' crimes from itself, even though, Mr. Verges has argued, they represent atrocities comparable to those committed by the Nazis. The anticipation of this defense by Mr. Verges had for weeks caused disquiet among many in France, who have voiced fears that it would amount to what has been called a ''falsification of history'' and a ''trivialization'' of the Nazi genocide against the Jews. Joining Mr. Verges on the defense bench in the last few days have been two other lawyers, Jean-Martin M'Bemba, a Congolese, and Nabil Bouaita, an Algerian. The presence of a black lawyer and an Arab lawyer on the defense team of Mr. Barbie has been seen here as highly curious, in view of Nazi notions of racial supremacy, and also symbolic of the strategy that Mr. Verges's has employed. Mr. M'Bemba, who was not in the courtroom during the prosecution's presentation of witnesses, argued that the concept of crimes against humanity should be enlarged to include what he defined as colonialist crimes. He gave two examples in support of his contention. One was the building in colonial-era French Congo of the 300-mile Brazzaville-Pointe Noire Railroad, which, he argued, resulted in the deaths of thousands of forced African laborers. The other example was the French repression of a 1947 anti-colonialist uprising in Madagascar, during which, he claimed, 89,000 Africans were killed. French historians have put the number closer to 10,000. Mr. M'Bemba also called apartheid ''the ultimate crime against humanity,'' arguing that the West, in bringing Mr. Barbie to trial, should also make efforts to prosecute South Africa's white political leaders. Mr. Bouaita, 36 years old, included in this definition of ''crimes against humanity'' the United States' combat role in Vietnam, the Turkish killing of Armenians in 1915, and French policy in Algeria during that country's war of independence. Mr. Bouaita provoked angry protests from lawyers representing civil plaintiffs in the case when he invoked what he called the Nazification of Jews in Israel. Mr. Bouiata called Israel ''a monster'' that had arisen from the ashes of the Holocaust and contended that what he called Israeli crimes against the Palestinians ''canceled out'' the Nazi crimes against the Jews. At the end of the statement, Michel Zaoui, a lawyer representing civil plaintiffs, demanded that the session be suspended so prosecution lawyers could prepare a refutation of Mr. Bouaita's ''intolerable remarks.'' After a brief recess, the president of the court, Andre Cerdini, rejected the demand, but said the prosecution could speak after the defense had finished its presentation, Thursday. The statements by defense lawyers produced outrage among many court observers."
