"Following are excerpts from a statement by Islamic Holy War, the pro-Iranian Lebanese group that released a British hostage, John McCarthy, last week. The statement, addressed to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar of the United Nations, was delivered to him on Sunday and released in translation by the United Nations today. Why has the United Nations been given an effective and important role to play in solving the crisis that arose in the gulf while it has been prevented from playing any role in helping to find a just solution to the question of the Muslim people in Palestine in spite of the fact that more than 50 years have passed since the Israeli enemy usurped the land of Palestine? Why were the United Nations resolutions implemented immediately after their adoption during the gulf crisis while none of the resolutions adopted in regard to the just Palestinian cause have yet been put into effect decades after their adoption? What has the United Nations done to protect the human rights of Muslim and other oppressed peoples and to prevent the barbaric massacres that are being committed against them throughout the world? Where is the right to self-determination in the case of the Islamic and oppressed peoples in Palestine, Kashmir and Afghanistan? Do the United Nations conventions not make provision for the right of peoples to self-determination without tutelage or external colonialist interference, and do they not regard the struggle for self-determination by various means, including force, as a legitimate and justifiable act that is in no way related to terrorism? When oppressed peoples and societies demand freedom, independence, justice, a decent life and deliverance from those who wreak havoc with their countries, their resources, their beliefs and the future of their children, can they be regarded as terrorist peoples and societies? In this connection, we appeal to you, in your capacity as Secretary General of the United Nations, and to the world as a whole, to adopt Islam as an ideology, a code of law and a system and to follow the teachings of the Great Imam Khomeini, who expounded the principles and conventions on which peoples, movements and regimes must base their endeavours to achieve progress, to solve the problems with which they are burdened and to achieve happiness and well-being. The slogan of the need to combat international terrorism, which has been raised by America and its supporters, is a spurious slogan designed to leave them with drawn swords in their hands, which they can use whenever they feel that their interests are being threatened by the actions of rebellious oppressed peoples on the pretext of an end to the terrorist threat to international peace and security. However, the uprising of peoples seeking to achieve self-determination, recover their stolen freedom and independence, sever their links of dependence on the imperious states and insure that the principles of justice are put into practice is not terrrorism; it is a legitimate right. If the slogan of the need to combat international terrorism is an attempt to divert us from our course of holy war in the face of international arrogance, we will continue along the difficult path that we have chosen for ourselves without giving an inch. If its purpose is to maintain the state of open warfare between us and them, we are fully prepared to pursue this confrontation until we achieve one of the two divine rewards: victory or martyrdom. If struggle, holy war and resistance against the superpowers is terrorism, we and the oppressed peoples throughout the world are proud to be terrorists combating injustice and striking terror into the hearts of the enemies of God and mankind as long as they interfere in the internal affairs of oppressed nations and peoples anywhere in the world. We are part of the worldwide Islamic movement; the causes of the Muslims are our causes, and we share their sufferings and jubilations. By the grace of Almighty God, we shall always remain in the vanguard of the defenders of the causes of Islam and the Muslims and, in the cause of God, we do not fear the reproaches of anyone. The question of detainees and prisoners in the world today is one of the consequences of the confrontation between us and the forces of international arrogance led by America, the mother of iniquity throughout the world, and its offspring Israel. Consequently, the question of the detainees was a reaction on the part of the Muslim freedom-fighters to all those practices and an endeavor to secure the release of our incarcerated fighters. This reaction will continue as long as they remain incarcerated. Release All Detainees In view of our belief in the need for action to secure the release of our freedom-fighters from prisons in occupied Palestine and Europe and also to solve the question of the detainees whom we are holding and the problem of their families, we call upon you to make a personal endeavor, within the framework of a comprehensive solution, to secure the release of all detainees throughout the world. In such an eventuality, we would be perfectly willing to complete the process that we began today and to release the persons whom we are detaining within 24 hours. We are awaiting a practical response from you that will lead to the desired fruitful solution. We are waiting and praying that our incarcerated fellow freedom-fighters will obtain freedom with honor and that the peoples of the world will obtain the security and justice which we believe will inevitably prevail through Islam at the hands of the expected Mahdi, who will arise among the descendants of Mohammed."
