"To the Editor: The assertions of Larry Cox of Amnesty International notwithstanding (letter April 5), the 10 members of the parliamentary delegation of the German Federal Republic who recently visited Turkey have indeed prepared a unanimous report concerning conditions in my country for submission to concerned parties, including Amnesty International. he report is signed by the following members of the Bundestag: Dr. Peter Corterier, Ingeborg Hoffman, Dr. Alois Mertes, Helga Schuchardt and Karsten Voigt. It is dated March 19, 1981, and was sent to the German section of Amnesty International in Bonn. The report bears directly on Mr. Cox's allegation that torture in Turkey is ''continuing systematically and on a large scale.'' It first defines ''systematic torture'' as an ''official or unofficial policy'' of a government ''to order or tolerate torture as a method of forcing confessions'' and then concluded that ''there has been no 'systematic torture' in Turkey either before the takeover by the army on Sept. 12, 1980, or since then.'' The parliamentarians note in their report that they ''have reason to believe that the allegations of torture are ... being abused by those who have a political interest (in discrediting the Turkish Government).'' Misconduct on the part of low-level law-enforcement officials is a matter about which all governments must be vigilant. Our Government is energetically enforcing prohibitions against mistreatment of prisoners. Of 68 allegations of torture made since September 1980, 40 are still under intensive investigation. Criminal proceedings have been initiated in 14 cases. Investigation of 14 other cases revealed that the allegations were unfounded. During the same period, while scrupulously adhering to the protections our law affords prisoners, the Turkish Government moved vigorously to protect Turkish citizens from rampant left- and right-wing terrorism. The Government has succeeded in reducing the death toll from politically motivated murder from a daily average of 22 to less than one per day. The lives thus saved are an important measure of improving conditions in Turkey and represent a distinct strengthening of that most fundamental of human rights - the right to live.  AHMET ERSOY Press Counselor, Turkish Embassy Washington, April 16, 1981"
