"It was late, the fire was fading at the rectory hearth and the priest had finished writing his eulogy for Mairead Farrell, an Irishwoman slain in the time-worn rebellion. The body of the slender, dark-haired woman is back from Gibraltar, where she was shot nine days ago as she and two other rebels plotted to bomb a British parade. She will be buried Wednesday to the words of the priest who knew her, the Rev. Raymond Murray. The priest sat dispirited before the fire, hardly relishing another potentially violent bout of outside attention at the pained history and funereal persistence of Northern Ireland's embattled Roman Catholic minority. ''People don't even understand the simple notion of requiem,'' said Father Murray, slouched and deep-voiced as he recalled the scores of Irish rebels Miss Farrell led and he ministered to as chaplain of Armagh Prison. ''The Requiem Mass is a great plea for mercy, but they'll be saying we're 'celebrating' her struggle.'' A Plain-Spoken Adherent Far from being a romantic enigma, Mairead Farrell was a plain-spoken adherent of the Irish Republican Army who was involved in her 31 years of life in a total of two insurgent operations. These were interrupted by 10 years in prison, where Father Murray says he first felt the sharpness of her wit in debate in defending the violent I.R.A. struggle from criticism, particularly the church's. As England mourned her not at all, claiming a moral and strategic victory over I.R.A. atrocity, others were struck by a sense of naivete in the I.R.A.'s sending so inexperienced a woman so recently out of prison on a ''Libya-styled'' plot out in the vigiliant world of anti-terrorist intelligence gathering. ''Tell your Irish-Americans they don't need any part of Qaddafi,'' said another dispirited priest, the Rev. Denis Faul, referring to the I.R.A.'s supposed acceptance of Libyan overtures to obtain explosives. ''Tell your Irish-Americans to stick to the old trenchcoats and revolvers for their contributions,'' he said, referring to the old movie stereotype of the Irish revolutionary gunmen. ''Mairead was ruthlessly gunned down,'' added Father Faul, whom Miss Farrell resented as an anti-I.R.A. priest. ''Kids like her are out of their depth.'' An Instant Leader of Women Father Murray was more to her liking, since from his prison duty he came to be a leader in complaints of human rights abuses by the British authorities. ''It destroyed me,'' he said, describing the death and political struggle of the last 20 years and the militant women he visualizes as peaceful leaders in some other time and place. He saw Miss Farrell become the instant leader of scores of women through their darkest days when they held their yearlong ''no wash'' strike in 1980 over the British authorities' withdrawal of their political prisoner status. The strike and retaliation kept them in their cells 23 hours a day, the windows dimmed, the walls covered in the excrement of protest. With Miss Farrell in the lead, he recalled, the women shouted to one another in the darkness, prayed, wept, and found fresh resolve in the deaths of 10 male prisoners in the I.R.A. hunger strike over prisoners' rights. Others attest to a mix of militant dedication and easy friendliness free of the trouble-hardened edge that marked so many others. ''Mairead had something very likable, the quality of a friendly kid,'' said Elizabeth Shannon, an American biographer who is writing a book on Irishwomen and the contradictions of nationalism, religion and feminism that mark their time. ''She was really a cut above the rest,'' said Mrs. Shannon, who found Miss Farrell relatively unaware at first but then increasingly curious about the secondary role of women in the male-dominated I.R.A. Miss Farrell, however, insisted that a resolute woman could indeed ''get doing what the lads did,'' as she put it in an interview with Magill magazine 18 months ago when she got out of prison. ''It depended to what extent you were prepared to be committed.'' Her stark transition from the daughter of a middle-class hardware shopkeeper is no great surprise in the modern troubles. For Miss Farrell was of a generation of Irish women who, as young girls, experienced the explosion of the age-old sectarian conflict right on their doorsteps. Women from the Catholic ghettos tell of seeing their houses searched, their fathers, brothers and neighbors marched out, arrested and shot, too. ''If anything, I have become stronger, more committed,'' Miss Farrell said in the Magill interview, vowing the day after prison to get right back into I.R.A. activities. ''I always believed we had a legitimate right to take up arms and defend our country and ourselves against the Brits' occupation,'' she said, never accepting a divided Ireland. The British authorities, anxious over the I.R.A.'s plans for a martyr's farewell for her, have been emphasizing her lethal intent, both in the Gibraltar bomb plot - the I.R.A. does not dispute her role - and earlier, when she was a 19-year-old, gun-toting neophyte insurgent in a group of rebels who blew up a hotel outside Belfast in 1976. She always stressed that the occupants had been warned and were not harmed. But people who knew her say she could show strategic coldness, too, in weighing the effects, intended and unintended, of such a major operation as the Gibraltar plot against British soldiers who had served in Ireland. Requiem for an Irish rebel has always been a complex event, even a deadly one. On Monday, the hearses bearing the bodies of Miss Farrell and her slain comrades, Sean Savage and Daniel McCann, were alternately saluted by Catholics and stoned by jeering Protestants as the cortege traveled from Dublin to Belfast. Monday night, as crowds gathered in Belfast to view Miss Farrell's coffin, another rebel was shot to death by the police, who said he was on a sniper mission. Today, a Catholic man was killed outside a Belfast supermarket as he arrived for work. The police said the killing appeared to be the work of Protestant terrorists. The British authorities, their troops and the Royal Ulster Constabulary remain nervous at the propaganda possibilities and threat of violence. Black events have a way of piling one atop another in Belfast, and the armored police vans were everywhere, their silhouettes medieval with slotted armor windows impervious to the rock or bottle hurled from the angry darkness. ''I think we're completely and utterly helpless,'' Father Murray said, putting aside his two-page eulogy. His despondent stare was in contrast to his few spirited words about the manner of Mairead Farrell's life and death, the latter characterized as ''barbarous assassination'' in his accusation, for she was unarmed when she was killed. He described her in Gaelic as a ''cailin gairiuel, diograiseach,'' - a smiling, earnest colleen. ''Death has not got the last word,'' he insisted. ''It never will.''"
