"LONDON, Aug. 28 (AP) - Amnesty International, saying at least 1,000 people were executed in Iran in the first 18 months of the Islamic revolution, appealed to Iranian leaders today to halt executions and the imprisonment of people for their beliefs or origins. The London-based human-rights group issued the text of a letter it sent to Iran's new Prime Minister, Mohammed Ali Rajai, containing the appeal. The letter made no specific reference to the 52 American hostages, who will mark their 300th day of detention today. ''We have appealed repeatedly in the past that the Americans be freed and we said that their imprisonment is arbitrary and in violation of international laws and conventions and of Iranian commitments to international law,'' said David Laulicht, a spokesman for the group. Estimate Based on News Reports Amnesty said the figure of 1,000 executions was an estimate by its research staff, based on monitored news reports, but added that the actual figure could be over 1,200. ''We have seen press estimates that executions now number more than 1,200, and we think that is perfectly plausible,'' said Mr. Laulicht. ''The executions cover everything - crime, corruption, narcotics and sexual offenses.'' Mr. Laulicht said that because its resources were limited, Amnesty stopped close monitoring of reports from Iran a year ago, when it had recorded 438 executions from the time the revolutionary regime took over in mid-February 1979 to early August 1979. The Amnesty statement came within hours of a report by Teheran Radio that seven men were shot by a firing squad at dawn today in Ahwaz, in connection with an alleged coup plot last month.  Approximately 80 people have been executed as a result of the plot so far, according to media reports. Appeals to the Shah The letter to Mr. Rajai recalled that before the revolution that deposed him, Amnesty ''appealed time and time again to the late Shah for a stop to executions, torture and the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience.'' It said that Amnesty was saddened to see continued human-rights violations since the revolution ''and especially the large number of executions which have taken place.'' People brought before Islamic revolutionary tribunals were consistently denied fair trials, the letter said. Last September, Amnesty produced a report on human rights in Iran based on a 20-day visit by a fact-finding mission two months after the revolution, and a study of ''hundreds of trials'' by the tribunals. Iranian authorities have not replied to the report, Amnesty said. The human-rights organization won the Nobel Peace Prize for 1977 for its campaigns to free political prisoners. Soviet Union Rejects Charges LONDON, Friday, Aug. 29 (Reuters) -Andrei A. Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign Minister, today rejected charges that the Soviet Union was interfering in Iran's internal affairs. Mr. Gromyko, whose statement over the Moscow radio's Persian language service was monitored in London, was responding to a letter sent by the Iranian Foreign Minister, Sadegh Ghotbzadeh, two weeks ago."
