"The military junta in the Sudan has introduced an era of repression marked by the detention and torture of suspected political opponents that surpasses the worst excesses of the longtime military Government that ruled from 1969 to the mid-80's, a human rights observer group says. In a report made public today, Africa Watch, an organization based in the United States and Britain, said the junta of Lieut. Gen. Omar al-Bashir, which overthrew a democratically elected Government in June, combines militarism and Islamic fundamentalism. The report called this ''a new and very dangerous phenomenon'' for the Sudan. Civilian opponents of the Government in Khartoum, including trade-union leaders, doctors, lawyers and university professors, have been targets of the new regime, the report said. Tribes in the southern Sudan are victims of rights abuses perpetuated by both sides in the increasingly deadly civil war, it added. The United States regards the Sudan as strategically important because of its size and location; it borders eight African countries, including Egypt and Libya. But Washington, a major supplier of aid to the longtime military-based Government of Gen. Gaafar al-Nimeiry, who led the sub-Saharan country from 1969 to 1985, appears to have lost whatever influence it had in Khartoum as the new junta increasingly turns toward militant Arab countries, including Libya. U.S. Food Aid Continues American economic and military aid to the Sudan ended last month under a law that bans aid to a junta that has overthrown a democracy. Washington continues to provide food aid to both sides in the civil conflict, for distribution to victims of the largely war-induced famine. The Africa Watch report provides detailed testimony about a new and shadowy security agency created by General Bashir's Government to intimidate its opposition. Known as Islamic Security, or the the Security of the Revolution, the agency has been responsible for mass arrests and ill treatment of political prisoners, the report said, quoting detainees who have recently been released. The prisoners were usually tortured at intelligence safe-houses in Khartoum, the report said. One of the places where detainees were tortured was the the club of the Bar Association, which was disbanded by the new leader; the room where beatings took place had the words ''Human Rights Chamber'' scrawled on its door, Africa Watch said. One person arrested on the day of the coup told Africa Watch that the new security agency was controlled by the most radical members of the National Islamic Front, a well-financed fundamentalist Islamic group with senior positions in the army. Doctors Are Targets Physicians who led a strike in November were particularly badly treated, said the detainee, who requested anonymity. Dr. Tariq Ismail, a member of the doctors' union, told another detainee that he was arrested, blindfolded and taken to a safe-house, where he was forced at gunpoint to sit in ice water in a bathtub. ''After he got out, he was blindfolded and then beaten all over his body,'' the detainee said. ''His body is covered with marks. As they beat him, he was interrogated and subjected to verbal abuse. After two to three hours, he and the other five doctors were forced to undergo the bathtub treatment - stay half an hour in the ice water. This continued for six weeks.''"
