"In my post, I constantly encounter representatives of human rights groups whose strong feelings about human rights abuses in the world is manifest and at times moving. Too often, however, the depths of their analysis does not match the depth of their emotion - and the consequences can be harmful to human rights. In a trip to Turkey last month, I saw a typical outcome of human rights activists' inability to combine the heat of moral passion with the light of intellectual insight: Not only Turkish generals and politicians but also many journalists and intellectuals have little sympathy for those Western human rights groups who claim to speak for them. Turkey's treatment at the hands of its critics demonstrates the major shortcoming of far too many human rights groups: an appalling shallowness of analysis. The unique historical, social and geopolitical conditions of a particular country are often simply ignored. The most difficult problem - what will be effective in a particular case - is rarely addressed. And in many cases, as in Turkey, this intellectual failure is matched by political failure. Not only have many human rights groups been unable to fashion policy recommendations that offer a prayer of being effective but the people they claim to champion frequently resent the activists' shrill and uninformed criticisms of their country.  Understanding modern Turkey requires an appreciation of the historical achievement of Kemal Atat""urk, who in 1923 created the Turkish Republic and laid down its philosophic foundation - secular civilian rule, an independent judiciary and parliamentary democratic government. Turkey is the only country with an Islamic culture that can truly be called a democracy, and its success or failure at democracy has enormous ramifications for democratic prospects throughout Southwest Asia and the Middle East.  A loyal member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Turkey has had rough going. Bordered by Bulgaria, the Soviet Union, Iran, Iraq and Syria, it has been subverted almost constantly by those who seek to exploit every weakness. Instability and anarchy have three times caused the military - the traditional guardians of Atat""urk's principles - to move in to restore order. The last time was in September 1980 - and there is no question that there was a broad public consensus for the takeover.  In the late 1970's and early 1980, the civilian Government was paralyzed, inflation raged at 400 percent and virtually every institution in the country was sharply polarized into rightist and leftist factions. Political killings averaged more than 20 per day. Terrorists, often with foreign complicity, were smuggling in tons of arms and explosives. The universities became battlegrounds, with leftist students calling in leftist factions of the police to attack rightist students and rightist students responding in kind. Only those who wished to see Turkey further destabilized objected to the takeover. The military's pledge to restore order and return to democracy is being kept. A new Constitution was adopted by national referendum in 1982, national and local elections have been held and journalists and generals alike expect that martial law will gradually be lifted in all provinces. But to listen to many of Turkey's Western human rights critics, especially in Europe, you would think none of them had ever consulted a map to learn Turkey's location, opened a history book to learn of its past or read a newspaper during the crisis years of the late 1970's. These groups raised no clamor when terrorists roamed the streets threatening every Turk's human rights. With the notable exception of Amnesty International, none said very much about torture during the ''progressive'' reign of the Socialist Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit. Most of the loud and public Western criticism of Turkey has taken place only since 1980. Helsinki Watch, for example, predicted that the election of November 1983 would be a farce, claiming that the Motherland Party, which is hardly the favorite of the generals, would be forced into a coalition with one of the military's favored parties. When the Motherland Party won an overwhelming victory, Helsinki Watch then claimed, with bizarre logic, that the results demonstrated the Turkish people's lack of confidence in the return to parliamentary democracy. Nor is Helsinki Watch the only group to make such errors. Recently, a Council of Europe delegation visited Diyarbakir prison and saw prisoners whom Amnesty International had listed as dead. Nevertheless, the delegates refused to acknowledge the possibility that they were ill-informed about the human rights picture in Turkey.  Let there be no doubt: Turkey is a country with serious human rights problems. Martial law regulations limit freedom of the press, free speech and trade union activity. Conditions in Turkish prisons are often utterly unacceptable by Western standards. Torture occurs with apparent regularity. These problems are not in dispute: The real issue is what causes such human rights violations and what will cure them. Regarding martial law, Turkish journalists with whom I spoke resented the current restrictions but said they had been steadily reduced in the past few years and were confident that they would be eliminated. As for prison conditions, these have not changed for years, and one is entitled to wonder why the great clamor about them is so recent. In any event, berating the Turks will not improve conditions. One high Turkish official, when asked about the prison situation, responded, ''Have you seen our hospitals?'' His point was that Turkey is a developing country with a per capita income one-third that of Portugal or Greece. The most egregious human rights violation in Turkey is the existence of torture. Again, this abhorrent practice was not unknown under prior Turkish governments, and one may wonder why so many human rights activists chose to make it an issue only after the military takeover of 1980. Their silence then and vociferous criticism now persuades many Turks that they are concerned less with eliminating torture than with making a political point.  Unlike its predecessors, the current Turkish Government has acknowledged the existence of torture, and dozens of officals have been prosecuted - and convicted. One prison warden was sentenced to death for participating in the torture of a prisoner and most recently, in late July, a prison doctor and an army captain and sergeant were sentenced to 25 to 32 years by a criminal court in a torture case. It appeared to me during my visit that the military has made a firm decision to eliminate torture by military personnel and to stop torture in military prisons. The more serious problem is the police. Police forces are decentralized, very poorly trained and lacking in discipline. We would do well to consider helping the Turks raise the level of education and professional training of their police forces. Unfortunately, the United States is precluded from helping in this effort by Vietnam-era legislation that prevents us from training foreign police forces. This section of the Foreign Assistance Act, hailed as a great human rights advance, bars a sensible and active approach to the elimination of police human rights abuses. The Turks need our help in this more than they need our lectures. Turkey is at a crossroads. Whether it remains an integral part of the West, committed to democracy and strategically allied with those nations that seek to defend freedom depends not only on Turks but on the West. Turkey is not Sweden, nor should we expect it to be. The clamor of ill-informed and self-righteous critics does not help but hinders in the building of the modern, Western-oriented Turkey in which human rights will be fully guaranteed. B"
