"U.S. Buys Soviet-Era Jets To Keep Them From Iran Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen said the United States had bought 21 Soviet-era MIG-29 fighter jets, many of them capable of carrying and launching nuclear missiles, from the former Soviet republic of Moldova in order to prevent their being purchased by Iran.   A1  Iraq Extends Deadline Iraq extended its Thursday deadline for American arms inspectors to leave the country. They will now be allowed to remain until early next week, according to an Iraqi news agency report, while a diplomatic delegation sent by United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan tries to persuade the Iraqis to lift the expulsion order entirely.   A6 Shadows Over German Army Homemade videotapes were broadcast on German cable television showing troops in eastern Germany preparing for deployment to the Balkans in 1994, raising straight-arm Nazi salutes and making anti-Semitic remarks. German politicians across party lines contended that the incidents do not mean that the army has become a sanctuary for the far right. Chancellor Helmut Kohl said the videos reflected isolated incidents. But the disclosures have touched off a debate throughout Germany about fringe groups and the country's past.   A4 French Strike Slows Commerce Striking French truck drivers refused to take down the barricades that they have set up all over the country and that have disrupted trade across Europe. Facing his first strike, the Socialist Prime Minister, Lionel Jospin, sought to convince the transportation employers organization and labor union negotiators to return to the bargaining table.   A4 Sanctions Imposed on Sudan President Clinton imposed sweeping new sanctions on Sudan for its alleged sponsorship of terrorism and human rights abuses. The action stiffens existing sanctions, blocking all Sudanese assets in the United States. But it provides exceptions for some activity considered essential to American interests on a case-by-case basis.   A7 Senate Rallies to Fast Track The Senate voted 69 to 31 to break a filibuster and bring legislation to the floor that would renew expanded presidential authority in trade negotiations. The margin suggested that President Clinton had probably mustered enough support to have the legislation approved in the Senate, although he still faces opposition in the House of Representatives.   A8 New Allegation in Hamas Attack Israeli intelligence officials were reported to have said in hearings looking into the bungled attempt to assassinate a leader of a militant Islamic group in Jordan that Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and other high-ranking officials had played a direct role in selecting the person who was the assassination target.   A9 Opposition From Hatch Imperils Rights Nominee The chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, Orrin G. Hatch, said he would vote against the nomination of Bill Lann Lee to be Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, throwing into serious question Mr. Lee's effort to become the first Asian-American to serve as the Government's top civil rights enforcer. A1 G.O.P. Wins Virginia Race James S. Gilmore 3d, a former state attorney general who vowed to eliminate an unpopular vehicle tax if he were elected governor of Virginia, won the chance to keep his word. With a wide margin of victory that seemed improbable just two weeks ago, Mr. Gilmore, 48, defeated his Democratic challenger, Donald S. Beyer Jr., the two-term lieutenant governor who had derided the tax cut plan as foolhardly and too expensive for the state's future.   A24 Record Fund-Raiser Planned The Senate's two chief opponents of efforts to overhaul campaign finance laws, Trent Lott and Mitch McConnell, will preside over what is expected to be the most lucrative Senate fund-raising dinner ever. The goal of today's event, sponsored by the National Republican Senatorial Committee, is to raise $6 million.   A25 Lawyers for Nanny Urge Mercy Lawyers for Louise Woodward, the British au pair sentenced to life in prison for murdering the baby in her care, placed her fate directly in the hands of her trial judge, imploring him to overturn her jury conviction. Prosecutors said Ms. Woodward's conviction should stand and the judge said he might issue a decision as early as today.   A10 Salvadoran Guerrilla Deported A former Salvadoran guerrilla commander who was resettled in the United States despite evidence that he once helped plan an attack in which six Americans were killed has been deported to El Salvador, immigration officials said.   A25 Cancer Risk in Weight Gain A study of more than 95,000 nurses provides what may be the strongest evidence yet that women who put on a lot of weight during adulthood raise their risk of breast cancer substantially.   A12 Court Hears Immigration Case A constitutional challenge to a Federal immigration law governing the citizenship of foreign-born illegitimate children who have an American parent led to a spirited Supreme Court argument, one that ranged over the respective natures of motherhood and fatherhood.   A22 Mars Mission at Likely End Officials at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., said they would not give up trying to re-establish communications with the Pathfinder craft on Mars -- which has not been heard from in about a month -- but they will scale back their efforts to regain radio contact to once every two weeks at least to the end of the year.   A10 Giuliani Re-elected Mayor In Win Over Messinger Rudolph W. Giuliani became the second Republican in 60 years to be elected to a second term as Mayor of New York City, defeating Ruth W. Messinger, as he continued to redefine the rules of partisan politics in New York municipal elections.   A1 With his victory, Mr. Giuliani suddenly finds himself an undisputed national figure with far greater power to remake the city's government.   A1 Arguments End in Bomb Trial The lawyer for Ramzi Ahmed Yousef, the man accused of organizing the bombing of the World Trade Center in 1993, told a jury in Federal Court that although his client was ""an unpopular defendant,"" prosecutors had failed to prove his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.   B13 Moscow Seeks Police Apology New York City police officers clashed with a Russian diplomat's chauffeur, prompting Moscow to demand an apology from the United States and prompting City Hall, in turn, to assail the envoys as intolerable lawbreakers.   B12 Editorials: Mayor Giuliani's victory; Republican health-care mistakes; the Taliban's war on women. Columns: William Safire, Maureen Dowd. Price Ceiling Upheld In one of its most important antitrust decisions in years, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously that a manufacturer or supplier does not necessarily violate Federal antitrust law by placing a ceiling on the retail price a dealer can charge for its products. The ruling overturned a much disputed 29-year-old precedent that regarded limits on retail markups as illegal price-fixing, a violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.   A1 Microsoft Plans Cable Buy Microsoft is close to an agreement to invest up to $1 billion in the cable television operations of US West. The investment would further the company's strategy of turning the nation's cable systems into the primary providers of high-speed access to the Internet.   D1 BellSouth Denied New Market The Justice Department recommended that BellSouth not be allowed to offer long-distance service in South Carolina, dealing another blow to the ambitions of the regional Bell telephone companies.   D1 U.S. Stocks Up Slightly Stocks finished modestly higher despite another selloff in Hong Kong. The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 7,689.13, up 14.74 points.   D12 Business Digest   D1 Chronicle   B10 Metro. Diary   A29 Crossword   B7 Weather   A22"
