"To the Editor:  Your Feb. 27 editorial ''The Darkness Called Iran'' properly underscores the brutal terror of the Islamic Republic. However, it is deeply misleading to suggest that those who, like myself, were actively critical of the Shah's abuses have been silent about the crimes of the Khomeini regime. We have deplored these excesses as energetically as we earlier opposed those of the Shah. Three years ago, for instance, we formed the Emergency Committee for the Defense of Human Rights and Democracy in Iran to express our continuing commitment to these concerns in the post-Shah period. The committee has been active in various ways, including urging the U.N. Human Rights Commission and other international bodies to cast their light of censure upon these outrages. We must recognize one crucial difference between the circumstances of the Shah's rule and that of his theocratic successors. The United States played a prominent role in placing and keeping the Shah in power. Khomeini's reign, however grotesque, is a product of domestic ferment and struggle in Iran. In this respect, there exists less direct American leverage and responsibility. Naturally, I feel deeply saddened by the course taken by the Iranian revolution. There is much for all of us to learn from this bitter experience in Iran. I can only say that the overwhelming majority of Iranians committed to human rights and democracy welcomed the revolution at the time as a deliverance from darkness. Khomeini's plans for post-Shah Iran were then obscure. He fooled, and later persecuted, many dedicated, humane followers and may himself have moved by stages and for a variety of reasons to lead the Islamic Republic in such a demonic direction.  There is one puzzling implication in your editorial. You seem to suggest that more vigorous protests by individuals on the left might yet have some impact in Teheran, yet in the same editorial you point out correctly that the left has been singled out, along with Bahais, for systematic repression. In fact, the left has been crushed in a far more decisive manner in Khomeini's Iran than it ever was under the Shah. One final word. Your own editorials were deeply critical of Allende's socialist policies in Chile during the 1970-73 period, and yet you hardly would accept responsibility for Pinochet's bloody sequel. To suggest that those who were hopeful about the prospects of the Iranian revolution somehow condoned its subsequent atrocities is disturbingly unfair, as well as false. Milbank Professor of International Law & Practice, Princeton University Princeton, N.J., Feb. 28, 1984"
