"To the Editor: President Bush's tragically belated decision to provide humanitarian aid to Kurdish refugees seeking to escape from Saddam Hussein's army is, we hope, only the first step toward abandoning a policy of craven passivity in the face of massive atrocities in Iraq. It should also begin the end of the Administration's policy of avoiding pressure on Kuwait's Emir to institute democratic reform. It was beyond callousness for the Administration to suggest that it would be interfering in Iraq's internal affairs if it responded to Saddam Hussein's brutal suppression of those whom President Bush had encouraged to revolt. It remains beyond understanding how the Administration, having risked the lives of hundreds of thousands of American troops to liberate Kuwait, could determine that Kuwait should be placed at the top of the list of countries not to mess around in (front page, April 3). Both assertions are at odds with the concept of a new world order that President Bush relied upon to support his decision to go to war. At its best, President Bush's new world order is the order contemplated by the founders of the United Nations after World War II. (That it is called ""new"" acknowledges that the order envisioned by the United Nations Charter could not be realized until the passing of the cold war.) That order rests upon two pillars: a commitment to nonaggression among nation-states and a commitment to fundamental human rights. The United States and its allies sought to enforce the first principle by repelling Saddam Hussein's violation of it. The Bush Administration has denigrated the second principle by viewing both Iraq's and Kuwait's human rights violations as merely a matter of those nations' internal affairs. They are no more so than was the Chinese suppression of students in Tiananmen Square, another instance of far-too-casual acceptance by the Administration of human rights abuses. The Allies' punishment of Hitler's crimes against humanity at Nuremberg established that a government's gross violations of its own citizens' rights is far more than an internal affair. FLOYD ABRAMS, DIANE F. ORENTLICHER Trustees, International League for Human Rights New York, April 5, 1991"
