"Middle East Watch, an independent human-rights group, has issued a report asserting that Syria systematically kills and tortures political opponents and persecutes ethnic and religious minorities. The report, ''Human Rights in Syria,'' asserts that at least 7,500 political prisoners ''languish in Syrian jails'' without due process. ''Under a longtime state of emergency,'' the report says, ''security forces routinely arrest citizens without charge, torture them during interrogation and imprison them without trial for political reasons.'' The report was issued before Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d's visit today to Syria, where he is to meet with President Hafez al-Assad on Friday. A statement by Middle East Watch that accompanied the report warned the Bush Administration that if it loses sight of Syria's ''dismal human rights record'' while working with Damascus to isolate Iraq, it could repeat the same error the Reagan Administration made in leaning toward Iraq during its war with Iran. 'Misguided Policy' ''In identifying U.S. interests with those of Syria, the Bush Administration should not repeat the misguided policy that Washington followed toward Iraq in recent years,'' Middle East Watch said. ''By failing to vigorously denounce, and impose sanctions against, the regime of President Saddam Hussein for its brutal suppression of rights inside Iraq, the West encouraged the Iraqi leader in his apparent belief that he could act with impunity.'' A State Department official said the Bush Administration had not changed its critical attitude toward Syria's rights record. ''We continue to be concerned about the human-rights situation in Syria and to monitor, report and raise issues with the Syrian Government,'' the official said. Middle East Watch is based in New York City and headed by Gary Sick, a Middle East specialist on the National Security Council staff in the Carter Administration. Syrian diplomats based in Washington and New York did not respond to telephone requests for comment on the report. What the Report Says These are among the report's assertions: * The Syrian Army and security forces have subjected 1,000 to 2,000 people to torture every year since 1984, including those held by the Syrian authorities in Lebanon. * Political prisoners disappear for years at a time, and conditions in prisons are ''appalling.'' * Syria's minorities, including Jews, Palestinians and Kurds, are discriminated against and persecuted. Among the 3,800 Jews who live in Syria, for example, ''political activity is impossible, surveillance is intense and emigration tightly restricted.'' * Opposition political parties and professional associations are banned. Those who belong to or cooperate with clandestine groups are routinely arrested, imprisoned and sometimes executed. The report also contended that the Syrian Government killed at least 10,000 people in the early 80's, when political opposition was most intense. The report may be obtained for $15 from Human Rights Watch, 485 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017."
