"To the Editor: ""A Gang of 6 at the U.N."" (editorial, Feb. 7) demands the following comments: You have most certainly not read the Human Rights Watch report that you characterize as ""devastating"" toward Algeria, one of ""six flagrant rights abusers."" I strongly suggest you read the report first. Or, you can also ask Human Rights Watch. It has visited Algeria very recently. It knows, and we know. You accuse Algeria of having opposed the application for consultative status of Human Rights Watch. This is a lie. And here is the proof: Algeria is not even a member of the United Nations committee involved. It is simply an observer (just like the United States, Britain and about 20 other countries) and, as such, cannot participate in the committee's decision making. Indeed, your editorial, and its reference to Algeria, was disinformation pure and simple. It seems that you have targeted Algeria, which condemned the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait on the very day it took place, because it opposed the presence of foreign troops in the Persian Gulf region and the recourse to war, convinced that the crisis could have been solved through political and peaceful means within an Arab framework. How vocal were you in denouncing real violations of human rights, such as the destruction of the entire economic, social and scientific infrastructure of Iraq and the ruthless and savage bombing of residential areas, causing thousands of casualties among the civilian population (and euphemistically referred to as ""collateral damage""); the intolerable lot of the Palestinians in the occupied territories, who have lived in fear and hunger during the last three weeks of curfew imposed by Israel; the cynical Israeli assessment that it will take months to distribute gas masks to the Palestinians? Do you not denounce these out of fear of tarnishing the image of a ""moral, clean and just"" war? Is it out of fear of tarnishing the image of a ""peace-loving and restrained"" Israel, the very Israel that assassinates with impunity the children and the women of the Palestinian uprising? How then could there be a just and equitable new world order, when flagrant bias and double standards continue to prevail toward all Arab causes? KAMAL KHARCHI Press Assistant, Embassy of Algeria Washington, Feb. 8, 1991"
