"For the second time in 10 days, Iran's Islamic authorities were accused today by a group of dissident intellectuals of torturing political prisoners and of making ''consistent and increasing attacks upon democratic rights and liberties.'' The charges came in a statement signed by 133 university professors, journalists, novelists, poets and playwrights, circulated covertly in Teheran and distributed to foreign correspondents. At least 27 of the signers had also joined in an open letter issued 10 days ago by 38 intellectuals, who accused Iran's Islamic leaders of retaining many of the abuses of human rights attributed to the Government of the late Shah. The clergy-dominated Government and Parliament were also denounced today by former Prime Minister Mehdi Bazargan and other members of the first Iranian Cabinet to be appointed with the approval of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Addressing a crowd of 20,000 people, most of them his supporters, in the Teheran soccer stadium, Mr.  Bazargan charged that the dominant Islamic Republican Party was trying to silence his opposition Freedom Movement in the Iranian Parliament.  'Kicked Off the Scene' The former leader, who has sided with President Abolhassan BaniSadr in the President's feud with the Islamic fundamentalists, said the Bazargan Government was ''kicked off the scene'' in November 1979 by those ''who want to monopolize the revolution.'' ''Some people tell us not to criticize the authorities because there is a war going on or because other countries will exploit the situation,'' Mr. Bazargan said in an oblique attack on the Islamic fundamentalists, accusing them of dictatorial aims. As he and his former aides spoke, some supporters of the Islamic Republican Party scuffled with his adherents in various parts of the stadium. At least two dozen people were arrested during and after the rally, but most of them were understood to have been released later. The 133 intellectuals said in their statement today: ''Once again, the nightmare of torture haunts our society. Once more, the torture rack has been erected, chains and lashes and cable whips have been prepared, and the political prisoners of Iran have been deprived of their basic human rights.'' No Specific Cases of Torture Cited However, the signers cited no specific cases of torture, nor did they say how many arrests had been made since the Islamic revolution of two years ago ended the Shah's rule. Their statement called on the authorities to release all political prisoners and end the ''torture and inhuman treatment'' of those who were held. They demanded that the authorities guarantee individual liberties, freedom of assembly and the press and immediately reopen all universities. They were closed last summer to allow preparations for what was described as the Islamization of academic life. Meanwhile, three British Anglicans due to leave Iran after spending six months in prison on suspicion of espionage did not appear at the Teheran airport today when their flight was to have left. Diplomatic sources said that the three - John and Audrey Coleman, both medical missionaries, and Jean Waddell, former secretary to the Anglican Bishop of Iran - were expected to leave tomorrow. What prevented their departure today was not explained. All three have been officially cleared of all suspicion of espionage, but a fourth Briton, Andrew Pyke, a businessman, is still being held in Evin Prison here. Also still held is Zia Khan Nassry, a naturalized United States citizen born in Afghanistan and living in New York. He was seized on espionage charges."
