"A prisoner who showed signs of torture by the Palestinian police died late Wednesday, setting off angry protests today in Nablus, on the West Bank, and a stormy debate among Palestinian legislators that echoed mounting public resentment over abuses by Yasir Arafat's security forces. The prisoner, Mahmoud Jumayel, 26, was hospitalized in a deep coma last weekend with a fractured skull, his body covered with bruises and burn marks. He was the seventh prisoner to die in police custody since the start of Palestinian self-rule more than two years ago. In a speech on Wednesday to the Palestinian legislative council, Mr. Arafat announced that three officers involved had been summoned for investigation, and he assured the lawmakers: ""We will not forgive anyone who has committed an offense under any circumstances."" But many Palestinians seemed unmoved by Mr. Arafat's pledges, reflecting growing skepticism about the Palestinian Authority's commitment to the rule of law. In Nablus, the West Bank's largest city and Mr. Jumayel's home town, hundreds of demonstrators marched on police headquarters, shouting slogans denouncing the officers who had held Mr. Jumayel at the Juneid prison on the outskirts of town. His body was later carried through the the streets in a cortege as mourners shouted, ""With spirit and blood, we will redeem you, Mahmoud!"" The city of 120,000 was paralyzed by a general strike, a protest tactic often used during a seven-year uprising against Israeli occupation, now turned for the first time against the Palestinian Authority. In Bethlehem, the Palestinian legislative council formed a committee to investigate Mr. Jumayel's death after angry lawmakers demanded that the torturers and their top commanders be brought to justice. ""There are more than 30 people in this council who suffered in the prisons of the occupation for long years,"" said Husam Hader, a representative from Nablus. ""I myself was arrested 23 times. But I doubt if there is a single one among us whose rights were violated through the kind of torture and interrogation that goes on in the Authority's prisons."" Mr. Hader was interrupted by the speaker of the council, Ahmad Korei, who rebuked him, ""Don't compare!"" But Mr. Hader shot back: ""We must compare! There is an organized repression whose aim is to degrade this people. The legislative council must take a firm stand, because tomorrow we could be killed by such agencies and irresponsible individuals."" Abdel Jawad Saleh, a member of Mr. Arafat's cabinet, said: ""There are seven who have died under torture in the prisons, and there are a few more, I don't know how many, who have been killed through violence and deceit in the streets. We haven't heard about verdicts against these people."" Azmi Shueibi, a lawmaker from Ramallah, said, ""Not only should those carrying out the policy in the prisons be put on trial, but those responsible for these agencies should be punished."" The outrage may have been heightened by the fact that Mr. Jumayel was affiliated with Mr. Arafat's Fatah faction in the Palestine Liberation Organization. A member of an armed wing called the Fatah Hawks, he was arrested shortly after the Palestinian police entered Nablus last December. He had been jailed without charges in Jericho until his transfer to Juneid last Friday. He was hospitalized under a false name the next day, and transferred to another hospital in Ramallah without official notification to his family, which only learned on Monday of his condition. He was finally transferred to an Israeli hospital in Jerusalem, where he died on Wednesday night. Palestinian and Israeli human rights groups say that several hundred prisoners are being held without trial in the jails of the Palestinian Authority, and that violence against inmates is common. Many detainees are members of the militant Hamas and Islamic Holy War groups who were rounded up after a spate of suicide bombings in Israel in February and March. Map of West Bank showing location of Nabius."
