"The Nicaraguan rebels have executed prisoners, forcibly recruited soldiers, burned a church-sponsored health clinic and killed civilians, according to a report released today by a human rights organization financed by Congress. The group, the Association for Human Rights, an organization of Nicaraguans in exile, detailed more than a dozen incidents of human rights abuses by the contras. The rebels' human rights record has greatly hampered the Reagan Administration's efforts to gain funds for them. The report said that investigators from the association corroborated reports that Nicaraguan Government troops were executed after a battle in the town of Cuapa, that four Mennonite youths were forcibly recruited to the rebel cause, that four relief workers were killed and their church-sponsored health clinic burned down and that scores of Indians were conscripted with the use of ''psychological pressure.'' The report catalogued incidents that occurred from August 1985 through April of this year. The report comes as President Reagan is about to begin a drive for Congressional approval of another round of aid to the contras, one that would see them through the end of his term. The Administration is considering asking Congress to provide $130 million to $140 million for 18 months. Supporters as well as opponents of the measure believe the vote will be close. When Congress approved $100 million in aid for the contras in 1986, it specified that $3 million was to be used for the ''observance and advancement'' of human rights. The Administration selected the Association as the monitoring group in the hope that its report would be credible and demonstrate that the contras' human rights record was improving. But instead, today's report was sharply critical and is likely to be a factor in the upcoming debate on aid. The group is headed by Marta Patricia Baltodano, a prominent Nicaraguan lawyer who had headed the human rights commission in that country until she resigned, charging that the Sandinista Government was not truly interested in human rights. Robert Kagan, a senior deputy to Elliott Abrams, the Assistant Secretary of State in charge of Latin America, described the report as credible and thorough. Mr. Kagan said he and other officials were not dismayed by the charges because ''there probably isn't an armed force in the world that doesn't commit breaches of this kind, but the number here is rather small for the time period.'' Nonetheless, Mr. Kagan said the charges were serious and ''we expect resistance leaders to pursue human rights charges, bring to trial those implicated and to remove those found guilty.'' Many of the incidents investigated already had been reported by other human rights organizations or in the press."
