"Perhaps no activity of the United Nations has been more colored by politics in the last decade than its handling of human rights. The United States has long complained of a ''double standard,'' charging that the organization plays favorites, concentrating on violations in countries friendly to Washington while ignoring others. Although the 43 member nations of the Geneva-based United Nations Commission on Human Rights tackle dozens of items during a six-week session every spring, it is the commission's reports on individual countries that receive global attention at the General Assembly in the fall. Countries are chosen for investigation by a majority vote of the commission, whose membership is geographically distributed and therefore reflects the political biases of the United Nations as a whole. But this year, for the first time, the General Assembly is considering reports criticizing abuses in Afghanistan and Iran as well as the hardy perennials - Chile, Guatemala and El Salvador. Late Friday, an Assembly committee condemned human rights violations in all five countries. The Assembly is expected to take a formal vote Tuesday, Human Rights Day. South Africa's system of apartheid and its occupation of Southwest Africa and the situation in the territories occupied by Israel are considered such grievous violations of human rights that they are dealt with by separate bodies reporting directly to the General Assembly. Special groups also investigate executions, torture and disappearances worldwide. There are, of course, many other candidates for scrutiny. Urging consideration of the state of emergency in Nicaragua, repression in Haiti, Paraguay, Libya, the Philippines, North Vietnam, North Korea, Rumania and Cuba and executions of opponents of Iraq's Baathist regime, the Dutch delegate, A. C. M. Hamer, said last week that the United Nations could do more to ''avoid the suggestion of selectivity.'' Still, the selection of Afghanistan and Iran was hailed by Vernon A. Walters, the chief American delegate, as ''a new beginning.'' Despite opposition from the Soviet Union, Afghanistan made the list because so many nonaligned countries oppose the Russian military occupation of another nonaligned state, according to commission members. Iran has few friends to defend its interests. Simply being investigated, however, does not always guarantee equal treatment. Speakers in the Assembly debate have complained that the reports vary widely in quality, partly because the mandates of United Nations investigators are ill-defined, leaving much to their individual styles, personalities and backgrounds. Some behave more like diplomats trying to negotiate with governments than like critics, say some human rights advocates. Investigators, barred from both Afghanistan and Iran, relied on testimony from outsiders. Nevertheless, the Afghan report, written by an Austrian law professor, Felix Ermacora, has been praised for detailing abuses since the Russian troops went in six years ago. It concluded that the regime is guilty of indiscriminate mass bombings and killings of civilians; mutilations and routine torture; the forced evacuation of rural areas; the jailing without trial of tens of thousands of political prisoners, and religious intolerance. On the other hand, Andres Aguilar, the Venezuelan jurist who drafted the report on Iran, has come under fire from Western diplomats, Iranian exiles and others who say he did not adequately document the torture and executions carried out by the regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Iran's delegate, Said Rajaie Khorassani, commended Mr. Aguilar for ''exercising a lot of impartiality.'' Some contend that panel reports can even damage the prospects for human rights in an investigated country. ''In some respects the report on El Salvador is factually wrong and leaves the impression that human rights is a high priority of the Government and the military, which is just not true,'' said Michael Posner, executive director of the Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights. The United Nations report sees a decline in death squad murders, which it says are not supported or protected by high-ranking officials or officers of the Salvadoran armed forces. In its ''supplement'' critique of the U.N. document, the Lawyers' Committee says there has been an increase in those killings, which it believes were carried out by forces under Government control. ''We see clear evidence that key sectors in the military lack the political will to end the abuses or to punish those responsible for past crimes,'' said the Lawyers' Committee report. ''Unless that issue is resolved, and until the civilian government assumes clear control over the military, we fear that El Salvador's ongoing human rights nightmare is likely to continue.'' Americas Watch, a human rights group that monitors abuses in Latin America, issued a similar reply to the United Nations report on Chile. United Nations officials acknowledge that the system is not perfect. ''You cannot detach the discussion of human rights from basic political considerations,'' says Dr. Kurt Herndl, Assistant Secretary General for Human Rights. ''The Human Rights Commission isn't like a court that determines whether rights have been violated. Political alliances play a role.''"
