"To the Editor: It is time that Americans stopped referring sentimentally to the diplomatic hostages in Teheran as national heroes and began to perceive them instead, more realistically, as the pathetic victims of our quixotic foreign policy. he unprecedented frustration and impotent anger that Americans have experienced during the past year are only a taste of the Iranians' own bitter resentment during the 25 years of U.S.- supported, brutally repressive and exploitative government following the C.I.A.-led coup that toppled Prime Minister Mossadegh in 1953. It is time as well to put a check on the self-righteous, and ultimately self-deceiving, posturing about violation of international law when it is clear, after American deeds in Chile, Cambodia and in other parts of the third world, that we raise such cries only when they suit our convenience. Although there is little public information about the officially assigned roles of the U.S. Embassy personnel captured in Iran, it is known by some who have followed events most closely that the Iranians do have evidence that half a dozen or more of the hostages were not operating as conventional diplomats but instead as what the Iranians have called them - spies. Couple this factor with the statement in a recent article (Foreign Policy, fall 1980) by William Sullivan, former U.S. Ambassador to Iran, veteran diplomat and a hard-line anti-Communist, that the White House - through the agency of Zbigniew Brzezinski -made inquiries during the winter of 1978-79 into the feasibility of engineering a military coup against the revolution, and a dispassionate observer can readily appreciate, if not condone, the Iranian motivation for seizing the embassy. After the 1953 experience, Iranians felt, perhaps xenophobically, that they simply couldn't leave to chance the possibility that America (perceived as all-evil and nearly all-powerful and with the Shah secure under sponsorship of the Rockefeller-Kissinger interest) might yet arrange to subvert the Islamic government for which they had so recently fought, bled and died. Furthermore, when a man almost universally denounced in his own country as an arch criminal, the Shah, is welcomed as a privileged guest in New York, the revolutionary students felt no obligation to tolerate American privileged representatives in their midst. If America could confer de facto immunity on an Iranian traitor and murderer, winking at his crimes against humanity, the revolutionary students reasoned that there was no obstacle to removing protection from suspect U.S. operatives in their own country. It is also time to cease harping on the ''horrible'' conditions under which the hostages are being kept in Iran. While it is surely true that the diplomats are no longer ensconced in $3,000-a-month luxurious villas (as they were during the Shah's reign) and that no incarceration can be fun, there is no reliable, impartial testimony that the captives are being mistreated. Of all the civilized captors of Americans during the past halfcentury, including Germans, Japanese, Chinese, Koreans, Russians, Latin Americans and Vietnamese, it is probable that the Iranians will be found the most humane of all. Indeed, to hold prisoners under inhuman conditions would expressly contradict Islamic precept, which the revolutionaries so often have been at pains to support. (One side benefit of the hostages' long captivity that no one yet seems to have noticed is that the diplomats have at last been brought into meaningful contact with non-elite sections of a foreign population that it should have been their job, in part, to attempt to understand. On their return, which, barring some irrationality, I have always taken to be certain, such perspective should be invaluable as a corrective to our policy.) Finally, Americans - in particular American officialdom - must recognize what all those who comprehend the attitudes of fervent Moslems have long known: that the Moslem warrior means what he says, and no less. A position taken on the basis of Islamic ideals is not negotiable. If a sincere Moslem claims that four conditions must be met before prisoners are released, he will not accept three and a half. If he says that he will make peace only when an enemy (Iraqi, Russian or Israeli) quits his soil, he will never submit to indefinite occupation.  MARTIN QUINN Beaver, Pa., Dec. 26, 1980 The writer, assistant professor of English at Pennsylvania State University, was a Fulbright lecturer at Teheran University from l977 to 1979."
