"Following are excerpts from the State Department's report on the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, compiled for ''Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1988.''  This report differs from many others in this compilation because of the greater detail available on the situation in the occupied territories by virtue of Israel's open and democratic society. The human rights situation described in this report also differs from all others in this compilation in that most of the occupied territories remain after 21 years under military government, and are, therefore, subject in part to military law. . . . Beginning in December 1987, the occupation entered a new phase, referred to as the intifada, when civilian unrest became far more widespread and intensive than at any time heretofore. . . . The Israeli Defense Forces, caught by surprise and untrained and inexperienced in riot control, responded in a manner which led to a substantial increase in human rights violations. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from Political Killing: Political killing is not condoned by Israel and is not practiced by the Israeli Government in the occupied territories. In hundreds of confrontations between I.D.F. troops and Palestinians throwing stones or Molotov cocktails or engaging in other forms of disorder, however, the I.D.F. frequently responded with gunfire in which casualties resulted. Precise figures on casualties are not available and estimates vary depending on the source and counting criteria. . . . Most Palestinian deaths resulted from the use of high velocity, standard service round bullets by the I.D.F. during attempts to halt incidents involving stones, firebombs, or fleeing suspects. According to I.D.F. regulations, live fire is permitted when soldiers' lives are in real and immediate danger. Only a specific attacker may be shot at; fire is to be directed at legs only; and it may be used against fleeing suspects only if a serious felony is suspected and as a last resort. Soldiers may fire only after exhausting all other means -including tear gas, rubber bullets, and warning shots. These guidelines were often not followed. Soldiers frequently used gunfire in situations that did not present mortal danger to troops, causing many avoidable deaths and injuries. In September I.D.F. policy was changed to allow the firing of plastic bullets in order to stop demonstrations or instigators of demonstrations in situations that do not threaten the lives of security forces and to increase injuries. . . . There were five cases in 1988 in which unarmed Palestinians in detention died under questionable circumstances or were clearly killed by the detaining officials. Israeli authorities in some cases prosecuted or took disciplinary action against security personnel and settlers who killed Palestinians in violation of regulations. However, regulations were not rigorously enforced; punishments were usually lenient; and there were many cases of unjustified killing which did not result in disciplinary actions or prosecutions. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment: There was widespread beating of unarmed Palestinians in early 1988 in uprising incidents and of persons not participating in violent activities. . . . I.D.F. troops used clubs to break limbs and beat Palestinians who were not directly involved in disturbances or resisting arrest. Soldiers turned many people out of their homes at night, making them stand for hours, and rounded up men and boys and beat them in reprisal for stone-throwings. At least 13 Palestinians have been reported to have died from beatings. By mid-April reports of deliberate breaking of bones had ended, but reports of unjustifiably harsh beatings continued. The Attorney General of Israel criticized this policy and declared it illegal. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention or Exile: Thirty-six Palestinians were deported in 1988, compared to nine in 1987. These deportations contravene the Fourth Geneva Convention in the view of the United States. The Israeli Supreme Court has disagreed in a formal decision. The use of administrative detention greatly increased in 1988. While the peak number of administrative detainees at any one time is uncertain, the number was 2,600 in September 1988. As of November 28, Israeli government figures put the number at 1,590. Most were detained for 6 months, although 20 percent of detention orders were renewed. . . . Secret evidence is often used as grounds for administrative detention, and it is not made available to detainees and their lawyers. . . . Since March the I.D.F. moved over 2,000 administrative detainees at various times from the occupied territories to a detention camp in the Negev desert near Ketziot inside Israel. Transferring prisoners from occupied territories, in the view of the United States, contravenes the Fourth Geneva Convention."
