"Gunmen killed 59 civilians in two overnight massacres in Algiers and in the southwestern part of the country, the state-run radio said today. A statement by the Algerian authorities read on the radio said that 11 people were killed in the Bainem area on the northern edge of Algiers and 48 were killed near the town of Tiaret, 140 miles southwest of Algiers. The statement blamed ""terrorists"" for the massacres, the term the Algerian Government uses to refer to Islamic guerrillas. The massacres brought to more than 150 the number of civilians killed in massacres, road attacks and bombings across Algeria in a wave of violence over the last week. No one took responsibility for the massacres and no independent confirmation of the identity of the perpetrators was available. The authorities blamed Muslim guerrillas for the killing but failed to convince major human rights organizations, which are urging the Government to allow an independent investigation of the killings that have gripped this country. The Government rebuffed demands for an international inquiry into the killing, saying it would be interference in the country's internal affairs. Thousands of civilians died in grisly massacres this year, most of them in poor districts of Algiers and in neighboring hamlets in the rich farming plains of Mitidja. The scale of the killings, many of them within earshot of military barracks, prompted human rights groups in Algeria and abroad to question the Government's willingness and ability to protect the life of the population. The authorities replied by saying that the army and the security forces are doing their utmost and adapting to changing tactics by Muslim rebels. The two new massacres came on the eve of the country's election of 98 members of the upper house Thursday to complete voting for Parliament. The Government is hailing the election as the latest step in President Liamine Zeroual's efforts to forge Algeria's institutional stability out of the ashes of a failed attempt to democratize politics late in 1991. More than 65,000 people have died in Algeria's violence since early 1992 when the authorities canceled a general election in which a radical Islamic party had taken a commanding lead."
