"Saturday's elections for a Palestinian president and a legislative council marked another milestone toward peaceful coexistence between self-governing Israeli and Palestinian communities. The voting extended the evolution of the Palestine Liberation Organization from a guerrilla movement to an elected party of government and conferred a mandate of democratic legitimacy on the P.L.O.'s longtime leader, Yasir Arafat. Mr. Arafat's election as President of the Interim Self-Government was a foregone conclusion. Facing only token opposition, he drew 88 percent of the vote. The legislative contests were more interesting. Nearly 700 candidates ran for the 88 seats, 7 of which were reserved for members of the minority Christian and Samaritan communities. Turnout was encouragingly high, even though the Islamic Hamas movement and radical secular groups boycotted the election to protest Mr. Arafat's compromises with Israel over territory and security arrangements. But some of their members ran as independents, as did P.L.O. activists denied official endorsement. Other independents included figures like Hanan Ashrawi, the main Palestinian spokeswoman during the Madrid and Washington peace talks, who was elected from East Jerusalem. Incomplete results suggested a significant number of these independents were elected. If these and other legislators take their responsibilities seriously, they could provided a democratic check on Mr. Arafat's previously unchallenged, and frequently abused, authority. The council's powers include deciding on legislation, passing on the budget and overseeing government performance. If the council were to vote no confidence in Mr. Arafat's government, the cabinet would have to resign. Palestinians see the election as bringing them closer to having their own state. Israel's Labor Government insists that self-rule will not necessarily lead to statehood. It is fair to say that the elections make the prospect of eventual statehood seem more realistic, a point not lost on militant right-wing Jewish settlers. For the most part these settlers did not follow through on their threats to disrupt the election. A large Israeli military presence may have kept the settlers in line. But in East Jerusalem, Israeli security measures appeared to intimidate Palestinians from voting. After complaints from international election observers, security was eased. Despite the East Jerusalem tensions, and an assortment of problems at local polling stations, outside observers expressed general satisfaction with the election's conduct. Israel can best serve its own interest by encouraging the democratic political development of the Palestinian community. If the mature voices of village elders, shopkeepers, doctors and lawyers can now be heard over the shouting of restless young men from the refugee camps, political arguments may gradually shift from the angry streets to the peaceful electoral arena and the overall level of violence may decrease. America has an interest in helping the self-rule government get established economically and politically. But Washington need not restrain its criticisms of any major security lapses or human rights abuses. The line between restraining terrorism and respecting human rights can be difficult to maintain, but Washington must insist the Palestinian government do so on the West Bank and in Gaza. Though the path has been bumpy and the timetable frequently set back, Israel's peace agreement with the P.L.O. has now been realized to an extent skeptics once considered impossible. This election brings both sides closer still to the ultimate goal of two self-governed communities living together in peace."
