"The Israeli Government is trying to induce the organizers of an international conference on genocide to cancel it.  The only reason the Israelis give publicly is that the conference, scheduled to open in Tel Aviv on June 17, would threaten ''the humanitarian interest of Jews.'' Behind this brief explanation, there is reportedly another one. The leaders of the conference, which was to bring together some 200 scholars from around the world, have been told by Israeli officials that Turkey has threatened not only the severing of diplomatic relations with Israel but also the lives and livelihood of the 18,000 Jews in Turkey. Turkey was said to object to the inclusion in the conference program of papers by Armenian scholars on the massacre of Turkish Armenians early in this century, notably in 1915, when they were accused of aiding Russian troops against Turkey in World War I. In retaliation, Armenian terrorists have long been threatening Turkish officials, and a number of Turkish diplomats have been assassinated. The issues raised by the reported Turkish warnings to Israel were discussed here today by the conference president, Elie Wiesel, a professor at Boston University and a writer on the killing of Jews in German concentration camps under Hitler. Professor Wiesel, who is visiting Paris, said that two days ago he advised other prospective participants at the conference that he would resign as president unless it was postponed. It was an action, he said today, that he took with the greatest anguish, and only after deciding that he could not support an event, however worthy, that put lives at risk, however unjustly. ''One life is more important than anything we can say about life,'' he said today in discussing the pressures he said were brought on him and other conference leaders by the Israelis. In Jerusalem, a Foreign Ministry official confirmed that the Government had asked the organizers at Tel Aviv University, the host institution, to cancel the conference, but he denied that Turkey had made threats or had been involved in any way. The Israeli official would not comment on Professor Wiesel's account of these threats': that they had been being delivered by a delegation of Turkish Jews who visited Israel in the last few months. The official declined to say why the Government believed ''the humanitarian interests of Jews'' would be threatened. The status of the conference is unclear at the moment. According to Professor Wiesel, two institutions - Tel Aviv University and the Yad Vashem Holocaust Memorial Institution - have indicated that they will not participate. On the other hand, the principal organizer, Prof. Israel Czarny of Tel Aviv University, has up to now insisted on going ahead. Professor Czarny could not be reached today for comment. Armenian and Cambodian Cases Professor Wiesel said he approved of the conference, which was to have discussed not only the fate of Jews under Hitler, but other forms of mass repression. In addition to the Armenian case, the program was to have dealt with the decimation of the Cambodian population under the Communist regime of Pol Pot in 1975-78. According to Professor Wiesel, he was told by an Israeli official six weeks ago that the Turks had let it be known there would be serious difficulties if Armenians took part in the conference.  Relations between Turkey and Israel, though cool, are of importance to the Israelis, for whom Turkey is one of the few nonhostile Moslem countries. Professor Wiesel said he first told the Israelis that he declined to alter the conference arrangements, adding, ''I will not discriminate against the Armenians, I will not humiliate them.'' Two More Messages From Israel He then received another message from Israeli officials. This one said that a delegation of Turkish Jews had visited Israel to warn that there would be reprisals against Jews in Turkey if the conference was allowed to proceed as planned. A third Israeli message followed, reporting a threat that Professor Wiesel, without wishing to reveal it, said was even more serious. He said that, at this point, he felt he had to act. He would not consider excluding the Armenians, he said.  ''The Torah says that to humiliate someone publicly is murder,'' he said. ''And furthermore, Hitler justified the persecution against the Jews to some of his generals by saying: 'Look, who remembers what happened to the Armenians?' I would like to show that I remember the Armenians.'' He tried to persuade Professor Czarny and his associates to postpone the conference and to reschedule it outside Israel. When Professor Czarny refused, Professor Wiesel sent out the telegrams announcing that he would resign. This, he thinks, may cause enough people to reconsider so as to make postponement more likely."
