"Pro-Government paramilitary death squads have killed dozens of suspected Muslim militants in Algeria in the last four months, according to Western diplomats, human rights officials and witnesses. The death squads have emerged in response to violence by the militants, who have killed officials, intellectuals and members of the security forces as part of a campaign to topple the Government, the officials said. ""The violence in Algeria is being carried out by both sides,"" said a human rights attorney whose life has been threatened by the death squads. ""Those in power and those trying to take power. There are frequent summary executions by those believed to be from the Government, or allied with the Government."" Messages Left on Victims The diplomats and human rights officials said the death squads are linked to or directed by elements of the Algerian army and security forces. Many of the communiques left on the bodies of their victims call on Algerians to protect the state against assaults by Islamic militants. The messages often end with the signature phrase, ""An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth."" Government officials say they do not know who is behind the death squads and deny systematic abuses by the military and police. The violence in Algeria has claimed some 2,000 lives since it began in January 1992. The two main Islamic groups -- the Islamic Armed Movement and the Armed Islamic Group -- now control many rural areas and, after nightfall, some poor districts. Police Are Targets Police officers are frequent targets of the Islamic militants, and the death squads often strike in areas where officers have been killed. Such killings have recently taken place in the slum area of Kouba as well as the villages of Ain Taya, 20 miles east of Algiers, and Saoula, 10 miles west of Algiers. On Nov. 17, a death squad left 10 bodies on the street in the coastal town of Bourj al-Kifan, 10 miles east of Algiers, after several policemen had been killed there. Reprisal killings have become so commonplace that neighborhoods where police or security officials are killed now brace themselves for attacks by the paramilitary forces. Number of Victims Doubled The death squads often double the number of victims who died at the hands of Islamic militants. If two policemen are shot dead, for example, it is not uncommon to find four bodies dumped by the death squads in the same place the next day. ""Every time a policeman is killed here the death squads strike,"" said a baker in Kouba as heavily armed policemen sealed off a street two hours after one of their colleagues was slain. ""It has become a pattern. We all try to lie low."" The first killing claimed by a death squad took place on Sept. 30 in the University of Tizi-Ouzou, 60 miles east of Algiers, when masked gunmen shot and killed a professor of Islamic law in front of his students. The pro-Government death squads include the Organization of Free Young Algerians and the Secret Organization to Safeguard the Algerian Republic. Western diplomats say these groups may, in fact, stem from the same organization, and they note that the wording of their communiques is often identical. In the first week of January, a death squad abducted and gunned down three men in the working-class neighborhood of Baraqui, again following an attack on police officers. ""It is difficult to know how many people the death squads have killed,"" a European diplomat said, ""but we believe there have been dozens of assassinations since November."" Police officials have ordered that the victims of such attacks be identified by number instead of by name, making it difficult to identify all those killed. Those who have witnessed abductions by the death squads live in fear, and many have been warned to keep silent. But a few Algerians told similar stories of kidnappings and murder on the condition they not be identified. In each case, these witnesses said, men in green military fatigues and ski hoods appeared well after the 11:30 P.M. curfew and took people from their homes. The bodies of those who had been abducted were found shot to death on a nearby street the next morning. Notes had been left on several of the corpses. On Oct. 30, two men showed up at the front door of a spacious house in Kouba at 2:30 in the morning. When the owner of the house opened the door, the masked men, who were armed with automatic weapons, demanded to see his 37-year-old son. ""They shoved a machine gun in my back,"" said the father, ""and made me take them to my son. He was barefoot and in his pajamas. I asked if I could get him his shoes and a sweater because it was cold, but they refused. The next day neighbors found my son lying in a ditch. He had been shot four times in the head. There was a communique from a death squad on his body."" Many of the latest victims appear to be those with relatives in the Islamic movement rather than actual combatants or supporters. ""Some of those being killed by the death squads are the family members of those fighting in the mountains or underground,"" said Ali Yahia Abdenour, president of the Algerian League for the Defense of Human Rights. ""They may not have done anything."" Bodies Left in Street The victims are often left for hours in the street before being taken away by the authorities, and some diplomats believe that is intended to intimidate the residents of the area. The factory workers in the small town of Baraqui awoke on Jan. 12 to find three bodies just outside the Ibn Taimiya secondary school. Residents said that military vehicles had been on the street the previous evening. The bodies were not picked up until 10 in the morning. The men had apparently been shot in front of a cinder block wall that is now pockmarked. Another weapon of intimidation is the death threat, written in French and Arabic on a computer printout, that accuses the Islamic militants and their supporters of treason. ""You are on the payroll of the enemies of Algeria,"" read one threat recently received by a university professor who is now in hiding. ""You support criminals whose only objective is to assassinate the best children of the country and destroy Algeria. Expect to suffer as thousands of children, widows, fathers and mothers have suffered. Algeria is standing. She will remain standing."" The threat was signed: ""The Organization of Free Young Algerians."" ""The day after I received the threat, two men in civilian clothes came to my house early in the morning demanding to know where I was,"" said the professor, who was involved in the Islamic Salvation Front. ""I hid inside. I saw they had small vinyl bags that might have held weapons. I stopped going to the university and left home. I sleep in different houses each night."""
