"Over strong Iranian objections, the Economic and Social Council voted, 22 to 7, today to continue its two-year-old investigation of human-rights violations by Iran. The vote came after a campaign by some Moslem countries, including Pakistan, Syria and Oman, to cancel the inquiry. It also came after a report this month by a human-rights group, Amnesty International, that said that Iran followed a ''pattern of cruelty and inhumanity'' in its treatment of prisoners, including torture and executions. Iraq joined the United States and most Western delegations in supporting the human-rights investigation. The Soviet Union and China did not vote. The Council also voted to continue investigations of human-rights violations in Afghanistan, Chile, El Salvador and Guatemala. On the Iran issue, an Iranian delegate accused the Council of carrying out ''a politically motivated process under the guise of human rights'' and said his Government would not cooperate with the inquiry. U.N. Experts Barred For two years, Iran has barred United Nations experts from studying Iranian prisons, on the ground that the experts are not versed in Islamic law. According to the Amnesty International report, Iran continues to use such methods as torture, forced amputation and summary execution against political prisoners and criminals. In Teheran alone, courts reported 6,400 sentences of physical punishment over the 12 months that ended last March, including 1,100 sentences of flogging for sexual and alcohol offenses, the report says. At least eight people were stoned to death, and Iranian authorities have developed an electronic guillotine to carry out amputation sentences, the report says. In what the report calls a ''long-term pattern of abuses,'' thousands of political prisoners and members of ethnic minorities such as Kurds have been imprisoned indefinitely, tried in secret courts or executed since the 1979 revolution. Religious Executions At least 200 people, most of them Bahais, have been executed because of their religion, and thousands have been seized and held hostage for the surrender of relatives and friends wanted by authorities, the report says. Iran has refused to allow Amnesty International officials to enter the country since 1979. LONDON, May 29 (AP) - Iran released a British diplomat in Teheran today after Britain protested that he was beaten and abducted at gunpoint in front of his wife and children 24 hours earlier. The diplomat, Edward Chaplin, was ''as well as could be expected,'' the Foreign Office said. At the same time, Iran protested what it called the ''illegal arrest'' of an Iranian consular official in Britain. The Iranian, Ali Qassemi, was charged with shoplifting, reckless driving and resisting officers after his arrest May 9 in Manchester. He was freed on bail Thursday."
