"Officials from the United States Embassy have had meetings since 1991 with militant leaders of the Islamic Group, an organization that is being scrutinized in connection with the World Trade Center bombing, said two members of the group who took part in the sessions and Western diplomats who said they were aware of the contacts. The militants, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said the initial meetings had been held at the embassy's request and centered on allegations of human rights abuses committed by the Egyptian Government. They said that sessions had been held in Egypt and elsewhere but that the contacts had been suspended after the bombing of the World Trade Center on Feb. 26. The blast killed 6 people, injured 1,000 others and caused hundreds of millions of dollars in damage. Exiled Cleric as Mentor Several suspects charged in connection with the bombing attended services at mosques in New Jersey and Brooklyn to hear the preaching of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, an Egyptian cleric regarded as a key spiritual mentor of the Islamic Group. The United States is trying to deport Mr. Abdel Rahman, but has not charged him. He has said he had no connection with the bombing. Three Islamic Group leaders who took part in the talks, though well known for their ties with the clandestine organization and their friendship with Mr. Abdel Rahman, said they had never officially identified themselves to the Embassy employees as belonging to or speaking for the Islamic Group. Membership in the group is considered a crime in Egypt punishable by death. They said the last meeting had been held a little more than six weeks ago, shortly before the explosion at the World Trade Center. ""We were never told why the dialogue was broken off,"" said one Islamic Group leader who met with embassy officials. ""As far as we are concerned, the Americans are welcome to see us at any time."" The United States Embassy denied that it had ever formally requested a meeting with representatives of the group, which has called for the violent ouster of the Government of President Hosni Mubarak. But embassy officials did not deny that several meetings involving three staff members and militant leaders had been held in Cairo. Statement From the Embassy ""There has been no effort to establish contact with members of the Islamic Group and organizations that have claimed responsibility for acts of terrorism,"" a spokeswoman for the Embassy said. ""The Islamic Group has not contacted the State Department to discuss human rights or any other issue,"" she said. ""The United States strongly opposes the use of terrorist tactics by any organization to achieve its political goals. We have no intention of meeting with these people."" Western diplomats who were aware of the contacts said United States officials were walking a fine line between seeking to understand the goals and nature of the opposition group and refraining from any official relationship with a known terrorist organization. The Islamic Group has attacked police officers, Coptic Christians, Egyptian Government officials and tourists in its drive to destabilize the state. The attacks, and police raids carried out against Islamic militants, have left at least 120 people dead in the last year. The militant leaders said the Americans -- three political officers from the Embassy, who often visited separately -- appeared to be interested in documenting reports of human rights abuses, as well as understanding the group's philosophy and aims. Memories of Iran and Sudan United States diplomats and intelligence officials stationed in countries with revolutionary movements, like Iran before the overthrow of the Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, were later criticized for failing to grasp the depth of popular discontent or the goals and structure of the revolutionary opposition. Western diplomats were also caught off guard by the rise to power of an Islamic Government in Sudan after a 1989 military coup. Some analysts have called President Jimmy Carter's decision to stand behind the Shah until his ouster in January 1979 a devastating failure in United States foreign policy. ""The U.S. officials wanted to know of human rights abuses in great detail,"" said one Egyptian militant who took part in the talks, ""but they also wanted to understand our ideology and outlook. The Americans do not want to repeat the mistakes they committed in Iran and the Sudan, when they supported unpopular regimes when everyone else had turned against them."" While few Western diplomats go so far as to suggest that the Egyptian Government is in danger of falling, many now acknowledge that they had seriously underestimated the power and strength of the Islamic Group. Most diplomats expect violence against the Government to intensify, especially if it does not begin to introduce political and economic changes. Party's Grip on Power But the governing National Democratic Party, which has dominated the country under various names since the overthrow of the monarchy in 1952, appears to have little inclination to release its grip on power or restructure the economy. Western analysts say that Egypt's state sector is bloated and inefficient and that its bureaucracy is riddled with corruption. Government officials blame the surge of violence on outside forces. They contend that the Islamic Government in Iran and the infusion into the militant movement here of Egyptians who fought in the Afghan civil war are the root causes behind the new wave of attacks. Mr. Mubarak's Government is counting on a tough new campaign by the country's security forces to break the back of the movement. ""The Mubarak regime is weak,"" one of the militant leaders asserted, ""and it is our impression that the Americans are beginning to realize this."" Yet while the militants said that the embassy officers with whom they had met had a grasp of the popular disenchantment with the Mubarak administration, they also sensed that American officials had a deep distrust of Islamic fundamentalist groups. ""These diplomats understand what is happening on the street,"" said one member who took part in the meetings, ""but they also have an irrational fear of us. We do not have a problem with America. We can have good relations, but they insist on propping up Mubarak."" An Important U.S. Ally The loss of Egypt as a close ally would be a devastating blow to United States policy in the Middle East. With one-third of the Arab world's population, Egypt is a critical supporter of American interests in the region and is the only Arab state that has made peace with Israel. Israel and Egypt receive 36 percent of all foreign aid in the United States budget -- $5.1 billion out of a total this year of $13.9 billion. The Embassy in Cairo has the biggest staff of any United States mission in the world. It maintains contact with a spectrum of individuals, groups and organizations, and the fortress-like compound is the headquarters of regional intelligence-gathering offices."
