"When Turkey asked to buy 10 Cobra attack helicopters nearly a year ago, the request seemed certain to sail through the Pentagon, State Department and White House. The only objections came from human rights advocates, whose concerns are typically overridden in such cases. After all, Turkey has been a reliable ally for Washington, and the Administration is counting on Turks to play a pivotal role in arming and training the Bosnian military. Advocates of the Cobra sale assert that 1,000 American jobs will be lost if the deal falls through. And just last month, the American military warned of ""credible intelligence"" that France was pursuing a helicopter deal with Turkey. Such concerns about maintaining alliances, protecting jobs and prevailing over foreign competition have persuaded the Clinton Administration to approve an array of other controversial arms exports. But this one is different. An intense lobbying campaign has erupted over the sale, and several senior Administration officials said the opponents have prevailed, at least for now, and maybe forever. When the Turkish President, Suleyman Demirel, meets with President Clinton in Washington on Friday, Administration officials say, the Cobra gunships will not be on the list of military equipment the United States is willing to offer Ankara. This is despite the fact that in the last four years Washington has sold Turkey 1,509 battle tanks, 563 armored combat vehicles, 79 jet fighters and 1,844 missiles and missile-launching systems. The answer is ethnic politics, Washington style: A fierce campaign against the sale organized by Senator Paul S. Sarbanes, the Maryland Democrat, a prominent Greek-American and longtime member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. With help from human rights and arms control organizations, and appeals to friends of Armenia, which can be counted on to oppose a benefit for its arch-enemy Turkey, Senator Sarbanes enlisted 21 Senators to sign a letter to President Clinton opposing the sale, which as recently as last month seemed on the verge of approval. Signers ranged from Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, and Senator Olympia J. Snowe, Republican of Maine, to Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut. The letter argued that Turkey might use the helicopters to attack civilians like Kurdish rebels. That concern was also raised by John Shattuck, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights. In a report to Congress last year, the State Department found ""highly credible"" reports of Cobras being used to attack Kurdish civilians. Turkey has been locked for decades in a war with Kurdish insurgents in the southeast. The Cobras are needed to combat this insurgency, a diplomat in the Turkish Embassy here, Mehmet Gucuk said this week. But he denied that his Government was guilty of the human rights abuses. The model of the Cobra sought by Turkey is the main attack gunship of the United States Marine Corps. The two-engine aircraft is armed with powerful cannons and can fire a wide range of highly accurate air-to-ground missiles. Turkey has lined up some influential supporters of its own on Capitol Hill. Senator Strom Thurmond, the South Carolina Republican and chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, and Senator Jesse Helms, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, wrote to President Clinton last November supporting the sale; the letter was signed by 8 other Republican senators. If the sale of the Cobras to Turkey were permanently shelved, it would be a rare moment of restraint in American sales to the region. Since the end of the cold war, Turkey and Greece have become among the world's major arms purchasers. Turkey imported $7.8 billion worth of conventional weapons from 1990 through 1994, putting it in third place (after Saudi Arabia and Japan), according to the Stockholm Peace Research Institute; in fourth place was Greece, with $6.4 billion. And Washington has been the biggest supplier -- to both sides. In the last four years, Washington has sold Greece 1,163 tanks, 420 armored combat vehicles, 16 jet fighters and 216 missiles and launchers, according to the United Nations Arms Register. Two months ago, when Turkey and Greece faced off in the Aegean over a barren islet, both sides were preparing to attack each other with American-supplied missiles, warplanes and ships. ""We're engaged in an arms race with ourselves,"" said Natalie Goldring, deputy director of the British American Security Information Council, a nongovernmental arms control research organization with offices here and in London. For the moment, the Turks enjoy one advantage, the Army Tactical Missile System, a surface-to-surface missile, similar to the Scud. It was first used by American forces in the Gulf war, and had never before been exported by the United States until the Clinton Administration sold 120 to Turkey last year. The Arms Control and Disarmament Agency opposed the sale, arguing that introducing the weapon into the region could lead to dangerous instability. Some officials also argued that if Turkey did not need the weapon when it faced the Soviet Union, it did not need it now. Now, Greece is asking to buy the missile, a State Department official said. The Administration has so far avoided an official answer as it tries to balance competing interests. As Washington deliberates, the competition is courting Turkey. A recent report by a senior American military officer in Turkey describes a ""French-led, well-orchestrated effort to assume the predominant role and influence in the future helicopter market of Turkey."" The report said that if the French won a helicopter contract, the United States risked the loss of the Turkish military market for decades to come. The Pentagon has proposed that President Clinton placate the Turks with the offer of three surplus United States Navy frigates. That idea has itself become the focus of a dispute. American officials say Greece objects to that transfer because the warships, with their guided-missile capability, would almost certainly patrol the Aegean where the two countries nearly came to armed confrontation."
