"International   A3-13 Clashes between Palestinians and Israeli soldiers raged a second day across the West Bank and spread into the Gaza Strip, leaving at least 39 Palestinians and 11 Israelis dead and hundreds wounded.   A1 Israelis, divided in elections 100 days ago, were united only in realizing their worst fears, with conservative and liberal factions blaming each other for the fighting.   A1 Palestinians spoke bitterly of dashed hopes for peace, with most of the anger aimed at the remaining bonds of Israeli occupation.   A1 News analysis: Benjamin Netanyahu and Yasir Arafat have begun urgently calling for peace. But the question is whether the men or the events are now in control. The international tribunal on the genocide in Rwanda began in Tanzania with a former mayor pleading not guilty to 12 charges, including crimes against humanity.   A3 Islamic fundamentalists reportedly captured the capital of Afghanistan, as thousands of civilians and foreign aid workers fled, along with senior Government officials.   A8 A Hong Kong man, asserting China's claim to a sprinkling of rocky islets, accidentally drowned after leaping from the deck of a freighter en route to the islands.   A8 Armenia arrested dozens of opposition leaders after three days of protests against a presidential election tainted by fraud.   A7 An apartheid-era assassin testified that a notorious South African spy was involved in the killing of Prime Minister Olof Palme of Sweden more than 10 years ago.   A10 With news that Boris Yeltsin's health is better than first suspected, Western diplomats expressed relief and the Kremlin dismissed Communist calls for his resignation.   A11 The Russian Defense Minister warned NATO not to expand the military alliance, saying the move would ""sharply change the geopolitical situation in Europe."" A4 London Journal: The ""sleepers"" of the Irish Republican Army.   A4 National   A14-27 The Census reported household income rose in 1995 as the number of poor in the nation dropped by more than 1.6 million.   A1 The House ethics committee said it had expanded the long-running investigation of charges against Speaker Newt Gingrich.   A1 After 188 days in orbit on a Russian space station, Shannon Lucid returned to Earth.   A1 Johnathan Prevette, 6, created a storm in his North Carolina home town and abroad when he kissed a classmate on the cheek.   A14 A financially struggling Michigan public school district opened a school in Detroit with the explicit purpose of making money.   A14 After 75 years of exile in the Capitol's basement, a marble statue of three female suffragists is to be placed in the Rotunda.   A18 The Senate upheld President Clinton's veto of legislation that would have made a form of late-term abortion illegal.   A20 Bob Dole accused the President of fear-mongering and distorting the Republican record on Medicare before elderly voters.   A22 There has been a role reversal in the dynamic between Presidential and Congressional candidates since 1994, as Democratic lawmakers now lean to Bill Clinton and Republican ones shy from Bob Dole.   A23 President Clinton went to Capitol Hill for a pep-talk with Democratic members of Congress.   A23 Valujet got Federal permission to start flying again three months after a deadly crash in the Florida Everglades.   A24 Scientist are accumulating powerful evidence that some people might be immune to the AIDS virus.   A27 The killer of Polly Klaas was sentenced to death.   A16 The President sought more changes in the immigration bill.   A23 Metro Report   B1-6 Business Digest   D1 Sports   B9-15 Baseball: Red Sox beat Yanks.   B9 Mets lose.   B11 Columns: Vecsey and Smith on the Yankees   B9 TV Sports   B12 Weekend   C1-32 Books, the magnificent obsession.   C1 Theater: ""Elektra.""   C1 Film: ""Secrets and Lies.""   C1 ""The Line King.""   C3 ""Extreme Measures.""   C3 ""Glory Daze.""   C5 ""Curdled.""   C5 ""Two Days in the Valley.""   C10 ""Entertaining Angels.""   C10 ""The Leopard Son.   C12 ""Cosmic Voyage.""   C16 Restaurants   C30 Art: Richard Misrach.   C25 Photography Review: Photojournalism of 1995.   C28 Books: ""Omens of Millennium.""   C32 Design Review: Costume and gender politics at the Met.   C25 Obituaries   B8 Editorials/Op-Ed   A32-33 Editorials Israel at the brink. Welfare, workfare and workers. Last chance for Sterling Forest? Children and air bags. Letters A. M. Rosenthal: Suicide of the West. Bob Herbert: Take the A train. Anthony Lewis: Covering up cruelty. Amanda Bearse: Sexual identity and the sitcom. Chronicle   B7 Crossword   C31"
