"Inmates of a military prison in this eastern Turkish city have told a military tribunal that at least 100 prisoners have been engaged in a hunger strike since Sept. 2 in protest against ill treatment. The prisoners who testified were said to belong to a leftist organization, Kurtulus, that had a wide following in this eastern Kurdish area before Turkey's current military rulers took power in September 1980. Since then several mass political trials have been held here, and the group has been accused of establishing a secret organization and trying to change the Constitution and the order of the state. But a prisoner named Ismail Iyem, who testified before the court on Sept. 7, said, ''The hunger strike was begun without any political aim but merely to stop the oppression and torture that have gone on in the prison for the past three years and to obtain the right of a humane life in jail.'' His remarks were contained in court records made available by court sources. It was the first known denunciation of prison conditions here since the 1980 military takeover. Several other prisoners among the 2,191 being held here also complained to the court about prison conditions, the court records show, and they said the hunger strikers would be joined by others if ill treatment continued. The court decided to notify the martial law command of the situation. No Progress Reported The hunger strike here followed a similar action in four Istanbul prisons, where at least 1,500 inmates began a protest in mid-July. The strike was reported to have ended after three weeks when the prison authorities promised to improve conditions. But the London-based human-rights organization Amnesty International said in a report on Aug. 10 that it had been told that no improvements took place. The organization said it believed torture to be widespread and a routine practice in many Turkish police stations and prisons. The Turkish authorities insist that they are opposed to torture, and the military Government has begun proceedings against some police officials accused of mistreating prisoners. Most people encountered here appeared afraid to talk about trials and politics in general. Government officials, journalists, lawyers and ordinary citizens, when questioned about the political trials and prisoners, responded either ''No comment'' or ''I don't know anything.'' According to the court records, Mr. Iyem testified that the inmates had been threatened with torture if they tried to prove their innocence during the hearing. Another prisoner, Adnan Gulluoglu, who identified himself as one of the hunger strikers, said he had been beaten and a tooth had been broken to prevent him from talking at the first hearing. He said he had witnessed other cases of maltreatment. In one, he said, a dentist named Remzi Kartal suffered a broken jaw. Another prisoner, Mahmut Guven, said in a 55-page statement that in June 1982 a group of leftists went on a ''hunger strike to death'' that lasted 43 days. He said three of them died. He also said four others burned themselves to death in protest against what he described as pressures and tortures. Kurdish Trials Reported ANKARA, Turkey, Sept. 13 - In the last three years, military courts in Diyarbakir have reportedly imposed death sentences on 53 members of the Kurdish Workers Party, the main Kurdish nationalist organization in eastern Turkey. Court sources were quoted as saying that 1,068 party members had been tried on charges of working for separatism and trying ''to establish a Marxist-Leninist state on Turkish soil.''"
