"The earth is scorched and the jails are full following Turkey's massive spring offensive against Kurdish guerrillas in southeastern Turkey and northern Iraq. The offensive involved 300,000 troops and militiamen. According to Amnesty International U.S.A., 600 Kurdish villages have now been evacuated, with four settlements bombed on a single March day. Other human rights groups detail unpunished killings of journalists, the criminalizing of parliamentary speech and the jailing of Turkish Kurds for espousing ""separatist propaganda."" To all protests, Turkey offers a reflexive reply. The Kurdish rebels are ""terrorists."" True, leftist guerrillas known as P.K.K. are responsible for hundreds of killings, including (in the words of Amnesty International) ""children, teachers, local politicians and other civilians."" But whatever its offenses, the P.K.K., or Kurdish Workers' Party, is not armed by the U.S. Turkey is. Economic assistance for the current fiscal year is $100 million, military loans total $453 million and direct training is $1 million. Add to that direct arms sales of $1.3 billion for 40 single-engine F-16's. Turkey is a NATO ally and seeks entry into the European Union. So it is a matter of valid Western concern when Turkey's war against Kurds escalates, when free speech is throttled and the political track forgotten as soldiers focus relentlessly on a military ""solution"" to a nine-year rebellion. Before his death early last year, President Turgut Ozal was seeking a political opening to Kurds; and the insurgents, for their part, instituted a unilateral cease-fire. Now the soldiers appear to dominate President Suleyman Demirel and Prime Minister Tansu Ciller, the first woman to lead a Turkish government. Ankara makes much of the fact that the Turkish Parliament every six months renews its agreement -- as it did this June, for the sixth time -- to let U.S. warplanes use Turkish bases to protect Kurds in northern Iraq. Americans are reminded that President Ozal gave full support to Operation Desert Storm. It also needs to be said that Iraqi Kurds themselves are engaging in a violent vendetta between rival factions. Still, none of this fairly immunizes Turkey from criticism and scrutiny, especially since Turkish warplanes and troops routinely cross the Iraqi frontier in hot pursuit of Kurdish rebels. Bridling at criticism, Prime Minister Ciller threatens to end U.S. arms purchases if Congress persists in demanding a 25 percent cut on human rights grounds.  But concern over an escalating conflict fought with U.S. weapons is scarcely a hostile act. Americans have learned at tragic cost that scorching villages spreads the very nationalism governments wish to contain. And jailing Kurdish members of Parliament for speaking their minds seems a peculiar way of promoting a political settlement of a bad war."
