"If American business has received a single clear message from the Clinton Administration during the last year, here it is: Join the age of ""economic engagement,"" by helping the United States win over the souls of authoritarian regimes through greater access to American capital and investment. That has been the logic with China, ever since the Clinton Administration dramatically reversed gears a year ago and argued that investing in China would change Beijing's attitude on human rights and the export of missiles. It has been the logic with North Korea, where American business executives are already exploring investment opportunities. And it has applied in Vietnam, where the Administration decided to take considerable political heat from veterans groups so that American companies would not miss out on economic openings. Perhaps then it is understandable how Conoco, the oil company subsidiary of the Du Pont Company, missed the signals on Iran, and ended up losing a huge oil exploration deal. After all, President Clinton appeared to be reversing course again today in using an executive order to bar the transaction. The Administration is still struggling to explain how it has become such a vociferous advocate of ""economic diplomacy"" in dealing with some authoritarian regimes, while preaching the need for economic containment in places like Iran, Iraq and Cuba. ""We draw the line in countries with policies that are beyond the pale,"" one senior Administration official said today, ticking off Iran's sponsorship of terrorism, its violation of human rights, its nuclear ambitions. But the market reality is this: While turning investment on and off may be the primary weapon Washington has left in its foreign policy arsenal these days, it is only powerful if the rest of America's allies go along. In Iran's case, that rarely happens. So the Iranians know that if Conoco is prohibited from spending $1 billion developing its offshore oilfields, someone else -- in this case the French companies Elf Aquitaine S.A. and Total -- will be standing in the wings. Nor has the United States had much success getting others to join its half-hearted ban on Iranian oil exports. For years, Japanese and American diplomats have professed the same goals in their attempts to change the behavior of the Iranian regime. Yet in 1993 Japan brought in 370,000 barrels a day, making it Iran's biggest export market. Washington has rarely been in a position to complain publicly about all this, because its sanctions on Iran have never been as tough as its oratory. Three successive Administrations have reviewed Iran policy, and last year Secretary of State Warren Christopher said the Administration's policy was one of ""active containment."" But the Government has all along permitted American companies to buy, refine and sell Iranian oil, as long as they do it off American shores and through subsidiaries. And once refined, it is impossible to tell the source of the oil. At least some of it undoubtedly flows back through American gas pumps. It was through this loophole that Conoco tried to leap. None of the oil in the deal it signed earlier this month was to be sold directly in the United States. No prohibition existed -- until today -- against the financing and service agreement Conoco planned to sign. As one Administration official acknowledged today, the deal was legal -- but ""flagrantly in the cracks"" of the law. The President acted, his spokesman, Michael D. McCurry, said, because the deal would ""represent a substantial new capacity for oil production by Iran."" He continued, ""And that is, among other reasons, why the President felt it would dangerously add to their economic capacity to do the things that we find objectionable in the world community."" Of course, that is exactly the argument that the Administration's critics have used in attacking its policy elsewhere in the world. Presumably economic engagement with North Korea, however limited, frees resources for that insular country to develop its missile arsenal, one of its biggest exports. Dealings with China inevitably enrich the People's Liberation Army, which holds big stakes in many of the busiest factories in Shanghai and Shenzen. China is periodically accused of shipping its missiles to Iran, another of the Chinese Army's main industries. So why is what is right in China wrong in Iran? It's not entirely clear. If Mr. McCurry's comments are taken to their logical conclusion, allowing American companies to buy upward of 25 percent of Iran's oil production is contributing to the regime's health and longevity. Indeed, that is the argument put forth by Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who is now the chairman of the Senate Banking Committee. He has introduced legislation to prohibit American companies or their foreign subsidiaries from doing business with Iran. ""We are subsidizing Iranian terrorism by purchasing their oil, and it has to stop,"" Senator D'Amato said recently. He is soon to hold hearings on the policy, hoping to embarrass the Administration into taking a harder line by exposing its internal inconsistencies. Perhaps the real reason that the Administration was able to act so strongly today is simple politics. After all, what Iran lacks in the United States, for understandable reasons, is any constituency in Congress. The Administration was under tremendous pressure from the business community last year to separate human rights from the issue of trade preferences for China. There is an active Vietnam business lobby, led by companies that realize that the country may be the last source of well-educated, well-disciplined and very inexpensive labor in Southeast Asia. But by and large, American companies are not clamoring for a chance to work in a country that still routinely calls the United States the ""great Satan."" The result is that Conoco finds itself where no business ever wants to be in Washington: all alone."
