"Kuwait's Prime Minister ordered today that all death sentences imposed on people convicted of collaborating with Iraq should be commuted to life terms in prison, the official news agency said. The decision on martial-law courts' death sentences appears to reflect Kuwait's growing sensitivity to criticism from abroad that the nation's postwar policies in general, and the trials in particular, have not lived up to the expectations of nations in the American-led alliance that fought to free the emirate from Iraqi occupation. Martial law courts have sentenced 29 people to death in the last five weeks, despite rising protests from foreign governments and human rights groups who said that the defendants had not received fair trials and that the penalties in many cases were out of proportion to the alleged crimes. The government announced Tuesday that martial law would end today, and the additional gesture toward normalcy on the sentences today caught Kuwaitis and foreign diplomats equally by surprise. The Prime Minister, Crown Prince Saad al-Abdullah al-Salem, who is a member of the ruling family, has been in London during a five-day Muslim holiday. He met today with Prime Minister John Major of Britain. ""The Prime Minister raised the question of people tried and sentenced to death,"" a British official told reporters later. ""The Crown Prince said he had commuted all the death sentences."" A spokesman for the Interior Ministry, Lieut. Col. Saleh Al-Mashaan, called the decision ""a good thing."" The ministry is in charge of the nation's police. Lawyers for the condemned defendants also welcomed the news. An American Embassy official and a State Department spokesman in Washington said that they had not been told about the decision by the Kuwaiti Government. But a spokesman for the United Nations said Kuwait's Ambassador had told General Secretary Javier Perez de Cuellar of the decision. The United States and other Western alliance partners have repeatedly expressed concern about the trials and other human rights abuses in Kuwait since it was freed from occupation. The news of the Crown Prince's decision spread quickly through the city, where many residents have said that they did not expect the death sentences to be carried out. The Government has said that a special review panel would examine all the verdicts of the martial law courts and advise the ruling family whether to change them. ""For the first time, they have done something quickly,"" said one Kuwaiti, Mohammed Dashti, when he first heard of the news. Mr. Dashti fought as a guerrilla against Iraq, and he said dozens of members of his extended family were killed for resisting the occupation. But later, when he learned that the death penalties had been changed to life imprisonment, he said he was unhappy, because he feared terrorist reprisals as long as prisoners were held. He said it is now time for Kuwait to forgive and forget what happened during the occupation. The decision apparently does not meet the demands of some human rights groups that the convicted collaborators should be freed, or that they should be given new trials. It also does not appear to affect the sentences given to hundreds of people who have been convicted and given long prison terms, such as a man convicted on the first day of the trials and sentenced to 15 years in jail. His only specific offense was having worn a T-shirt with Saddam Hussein's picture on it. The death sentences had been imposed for various offenses, and were given mainly to expatriates from Iraq and Jordan or to stateless Arabs who had lived in Kuwait for years. On June 15, the martial law court sentenced six defendants to death after they were convicted of working for Al-Nida, a newspaper set up by the Iraqis during the occupation. A few days later the court imposed the death sentence on eight more people, including non-citizens who had been serving in the Kuwaiti military but who were conscripted into the Iraqi militia after the invasion."
