"To the Editor: ""Tunisia Cracks Down Harder on Muslim Militants"" (news article, Jan. 20) contains a number of inaccurate statement and conclusions. You present the fundamentalist movement as a component of Tunisia's political map, but it is a fringe extremist movement that tries to undermine society and to hamper its progress. The movement's twofold makeup (a visible pseudo-civil organization and a secret armed organization) and the acts of violence and sabotage it has perpetrated exclude it from the sphere of civil political parties and movements. Tunisian authorities have nevertheless always dealt with this group in conformity with the law and with the aim of protecting society and preserving the rights and the physical and moral integrity of those accused. Following allegations of human rights abuses in Tunisia, President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali ordered the creation of a committee of investigation, composed of doctors, lawyers and people known for their independent positions. The committee visited prisons and held discussions with detainees and talked with officials and human rights associations. The committee concluded that some abuses had indeed occurred because of the individual initiative of people who had not abided by the policy and guidelines set forth by the President. Those responsible for such abuses were punished according to the law. As for politics, you ignore the real situation in Tunisia and the qualitative change that has taken place in all fields, particularly in human rights and basic freedoms. Among the measures initiated with the political change of Nov. 7, 1987, it is worth mentioning the following: The revision of the Constitution; elimination of the presidency-for-life; the amendment of laws on the press and associations; the adoption of new laws on political parties; the organization of police custody and pretrial detention; the protection of human rights; the elimination of hard labor; the release of thousands of political prisoners; the elimination of exceptional jurisdictions; the authorization of an Amnesty International chapter in Tunis (the first in the Arab world), and the ratification of all international conventions that pertain to human rights. The purpose of all these initiatives was the rehabilitation of fundamental and human rights, and the establishment of the bases for a democratic pluralistic regime in Tunisia. They have contributed to revitalizing political life by securing freedom of action and wider participation for political parties and associations in all fields. Many newspapers have reappeared, and in addition numerous associations have been created. While the Tunisian Government is committed to promoting the democratic process, it is also determined to protect that process from democracy's enemies. ISMAIL KHELIL Ambassador of Tunisia Washington, Feb. 7, 1992"
