"In a rare show of unity, representatives of traditionally hostile Arab nations have joined to fight the recognition of an Arab human-rights group. The group, the Arab Organization for Human Rights, has applied for consultative status with the United Nations Economic and Social Council. The group was set up in 1983 in Cyprus because its founders were not sure they would be welcome in the Arab world. Consultative status, of the second category, would give the group the right to submit written statements to the Council and be granted hearings. On Friday, the Council's Committee on Nongovernmental Organizations decided to put off the candidacy until 1989, for lack of consensus. The problem is that some Arab countries consider any charges of rights violations as interference. An American delegate, Kyle Scott, said ''legitimate human rights organizations continue to be denied status with the United Nations due to the objection of a few countries who are not pleased with this type of activity.'' Works With Other Rights Groups The Arab Organization for Human Rights, which is now based in Cairo, is working with Amnesty International, the Arab Lawyers' Union and other rights groups. In the Economic and Social Council, the Soviet Union aligned itself with the Algerian observer in expressing reservations about the Arab group, which has been critical of the treatment of Yahia Abdennour, president of the Algerian League of Human Rights. He was jailed for a time and then put under house arrest several months ago. Oman, the only Arab member of the Council, was neutral at first. Arab opponents of the rights group were able to persuade Oman to oppose it. Arab opposition is said to stem from the fact that most Arab countries have not ratified the international human-rights conventions. Enemies Banded Together At one meeting of the Council, according to one observer. Syria and Iraq, sworn enemies, banded together with Algeria to back Oman. Iraq said the Arab group was an instrument of aggression against the Arab nations. Syria said the group would be used by political opposition groups against Arab governments. Only the Swedish representative, Anne-Marie Sundbom, stood up to the Arab offensive against the rights group and proposed that it be accorded membership, be it without the right to be heard. Since recognition is by consensus, the unusual alliance between Oman and the Soviet Union was sufficient to deny the application. ''We will bow to the sovereign decision of the committee and be back for recognition in 1989,'' said Abderahman Youssoufi, assistant secretary general of the Arab Lawyers' Union and a member of the board of trustees of the human-rights group. ''I'm sure in the meantime, the cause of human rights will have made substantial progress in the Arab world, thanks to the action of our organization.''"
