"President Clinton has asked President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt for help in finding a prominent Libyan opposition leader who disappeared in Cairo a week ago, American officials said today. Mr. Clinton made the personal appeal in a letter delivered on Tuesday by the American Embassy in Cairo, the officials said. In the letter, he asked the Egyptian President to do whatever he could to find Mansour Kikhiya, 62, a United States resident and human rights campaigner who disappeared from a hotel in Cairo, where he was attending a conference of the Arab Organization of Human Rights. Mr. Kikhiya is a founder and board member of the rights organization. Administration experts on terrorism said they suspected that Mr. Kikhiya was kidnapped at the order of Libya's President, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, and feared that he might have been taken secretly to Libya. The Administration is hoping that Mr. Mubarak will put pressure on Colonel Qaddafi to resolve the matter, officials said. The first hint of an American initiative to locate Mr. Kikhiya, who served as Libya's Foreign Minister in the early 1970's, came on Friday, when Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, told reporters: ""We certainly remain concerned about his disappearance. We've been in touch with the Government of Egypt, urged them to make every effort they can to find out about what happened."" Mr. McCurry said Cairo ""has assured us that they're looking into the matter, but that their investigation has not yet turned up any information that might lead to information on Mr. Kikhiya's whereabouts."" State Department and White House officials have refused to speculate publicly about Mr. Kikhiya's fate. But Mr. McCurry seemed inadvertently to suggest on Friday that Mr. Kikhiya had been abducted, saying, ""It would be certainly premature to speculate on what's going on with this abduction."" Amnesty International issued a statement this week saying it was ""deeply concerned for the safety and well-being"" of Mr. Kikhiya, expressing ""fears that he may have been abducted by Libyan Government agents and possibly taken back to Libya."" Mr. Kikhiya, a diabetic who needs regular injections of insulin, was last seen on the night of Dec. 10 at Safir Hotel in Cairo. He did not show up the next morning for a meeting with his brother, Mostafa, who had traveled from Benghazi, Libya, to see him. His clothes -- and his insulin and syringes -- were found in his hotel room, according to Henry Schuler, a Georgetown University professor, an expert on Libya and a family friend. The disappearance highlights the complicated relationship between Tripoli and Cairo, which has defended Colonel Qaddafi against the United States and Britain in the case of the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am plane over Lockerbie, Scotland. The attack killed 270 people. Libya has refused to hand over two former intelligence officers charged with masterminding the bombing. Mr. Mubarak and other Egyptians have tried to convince Washington that political considerations make it difficult for Colonel Qaddafi to hand them over. Egypt has also allowed Libyan security agents to operate freely in Cairo, where they have intimidated enemies of the Qaddafi Government. Two other Libyan opposition figures, Jaballah Mataar and Ezet Magariaf, were interrogated by the Egyptian authorities before disappearing in Cairo in 1990, Dr. Schuler said. ""The opposition was told at the time they were in safe hands and not to make a big stink about it,"" he said. ""Then the opposition learned that these men were seen in prison in Benghazi, and they haven't been heard from since."" Mr. Kikhiya lives in Columbia, Mo., where he operates a real estate agency. His wife and four children are American citizens, and he is scheduled to be granted citizenship in April. He served as Libya's delegate to the United Nations until 1980, when he resigned to protest Colonel Qaddafi's executions of political opponents."
