"The wind has risen here, unseasonably ruffling the palms and bougainvillea in a restless land that is caught between a recent past dominated by one man's life and a future clouded by that man's mortality. Since Tunisia became independent from France in 1956, it has been dominated by President Habib Bourguiba, who has created schools, improved health care and promoted women's rights. But now the President is 83 years old and in uncertain health. His aides say his will to rule is unsoftened, and he has anointed no evident successor. Moreover, for Tunisia's seven million people - two-thirds of them too young to remember French colonial rule and the role their leader played in eliminating it - any vision of the future is blocked not only by uncertainty but by what the fettered opposition calls mounting repression. Labor Movement Crushed The independent labor movement here, once part of Tunisia's self-image as a modernizing land, has been crushed, replaced by a labor federation shaped to the Government's liking. Over the last six months, all opposition newspapers have been closed or suspended. The leader of Tunisia's Human Rights League, Khemais Chemari, was detained. He was then freed but left facing charges of spreading false news through interviews with foreign publications. The principal secular opposition leader, Ahmed Mestiri, is unable to campaign for public office because he was convicted last year on charges of organizing an unlawful demonstration. An upsurge of Islamic fundamentalism that challenges the nation's secularism has touched off a mass arrest of fundamentalists, charges of torture and harsh police tactics said to have left three demonstrators dead of gunshot wounds. The accusations of torture and killings have been denied. Aspirations Unfulfilled As elsewhere in Africa, education has created aspirations for a better living that cannot be met by an economy subject to outside pressures on prices. The freeing of women from Moslem tradition has helped fan fires of Islamic revival, because fundamentalists are opposed. Some opposition figures contend that a deeper malaise has settled over Tunisia, leaving some people bereft of faith in their ability to effect change peacefully, and others fearful of what that change might bring in a country whose neighbors, Algeria and Libya, offer no ideological benevolence. ''There is a fear of change itself,'' Mr. Chemari, the Human Rights League director said in an interview. ''And the problem of succession distorts public debate. Even in moments of tension in the past there has never been this kind of nervousness.'' The Islamic revival, Mr. Chemari said, had offered some Tunisians ''a bad reply to a good question'' about the nature of Tunisia's evolution. Its challenge, he said, depicting the revival as a potential, possibly exaggerated threat to Tunisia's secularism - for both Government and opposition -would be better met with dialogue than with confrontation. ''There are expectations within part of Tunisian public opinion that are pushing towards confrontation,'' he said. ''And we are convinced that our social and economic fabric is too fragile to bear the consequences of such confrontation.''  Uncomprehending Responses Such dire forecasts, and the tally of troubles - centered on the young in the country's radicalized and strike-prone universities - seem to elicit only uncomprehending responses from the authorities. After the detention of the Human Rights League director, for instance, an outcry in France and elsewhere prompted President Bourguiba and his aides to offer evidence of an opening. Habib Ashour, the jailed leader of the labor movement, 75 years old and suffering from diabetes and failing vision, was transferred from a prison hospital to house arrest. Young leftists, sentenced to six months in jail for forming an illicit organization, were pardoned June 1. Those gestures, said Mr. Mestiri, the secular opposition leader, whose views are not quoted in his own country, showed ''indications that there is a change of approach.'' ''But they are still very slight,'' he said. ''There are no tangible signs of a change in the attitude towards human righys,'' he said. ''The campaign against the Islamic movement is accompanied by a campaign against the secular opposition, the unions, the independent newspapers.'' Such accusations elicit their own responses from the authorities, who accuse the opposition of overstepping acceptable boundaries. ''We have urged the opposition to be a responsible opposition,'' Prime Minister Rachid Sfar said to an interviewer. ''Tunisia cannot create a democracy like America's straight away. It has to be done in stages.'' Among the opposition's faults, he said, was an inability to accept that ''President Bourguiba is above everybody.'' Bourguiba 'Final Arbiter' ''I have urged the opposition to accept that President Bourguiba remains the final arbiter and that his decisions, his personal decisions, are final,'' he said. ''There are other Tunisians,'' he added, ''persons who learned democracy in the Bourguiba school and we can make democracy with them.'' ''President Bourguiba believes that he made Tunisia what it is,'' said Abdel Aziz Ben Dhia, leader of the ruling Socialist Destour Party, the President's party formed half a century ago. ''Some things are immutable, such as support for the U.S.,'' he said, while discussing the President's anger over Mr. Mestiri's condemnation of Washington for bombing Libya last year. ''You can criticize the prime minister, the foreign minister,'' Mr. Ben Dhia said, ''but not the President.'' The President himself seems to remain publicly aloof from such bickering, pictured in the officially approved newspapers each day issuing directives to ministers at one of his palaces, his decisions and reverses the object of private speculation akin to that normally reserved for intrigue at court. Ex-Prime Minister Fled Abroad Last year, for instance, the President dismissed his Prime Minister, Mohammed Mzali, who fled across the border into neighboring Algeria disguised in a fez and dark glasses. He has since been accused of squandering public money. But most analysts and diplomats say his principal crime was that of flaunting a constitutional right, as Prime Minister, to succeed the President on his death. President Bourguiba also divorced his wife of 25 uears, Wassila, accusing her of adultery. But she, too, Western specialists say, had built a private power base. These days, the President's niece, Saida Sassi, who acts as nurse and and companion, is seen by diplomats and others as a principal confidante in the machinations that surround the succession, just as Interior Minister Zine Abidine Ben Ali is credited with Presidential favor for orchestrating the crackdown on the opposition. Yet, just as the wind in this city shifts and turns, so, too, do the accounts that relate to the President's vision of his own mortality. By one account, he believes that he will not die as long as construction work continues on his mausoleum in his home town of Monastir. Workmen, thus, have been taking their time for 20 years. Another account, offered by a senior official, is that the President has already had his coffin built. He keeps it in a palace anteroom, the official said, to show to privileged guests, pointing out to them that its principal fault is that it is too big. For in death he will grow no bigger than in life."
