"On the southern outskirts of Kuwait City, al-Riqqa cemetery guards the dark underside of Kuwait's liberation. In a corner is a section marked ""collective graves."" Here lie many victims of Kuwait's ordeal -- not only those felled by Iraq's secret police but also those who have died at Kuwaiti hands since liberation. Twenty-four of the graves appear to date from the Iraqi occupation, judging from the height of the weeds and the dates posted on several makeshift markers. The remaining 20 mass graves, their earth freshly turned, appear to have been dug more recently. Terrified grave diggers whispered to me that many of the bodies showed signs of unspeakable torture. The registry book in a room in the grave diggers' compound provides clues about the newer graves. Some are filled with Iraqi victims: bodies held for burial until after liberation. But the book also records the burial of 54 ""unidentified bodies"" of people who appear to have died since March 6 -- a week after liberation. When the registry shows a cause of death, the victims are described as ""killed,"" in contrast to ""natural causes"" cited elsewhere. As required, most of the bodies were first received at hospital morgues; this resulted in a paper trail. I was able to obtain documentation for two unidentified bodies received from Farwaniyya Hospital and buried March 19. A March 18 hospital memo reveals that the bodies of people who died March 12 and 13 were received from the Ardhiyya police station. In one unusual entry in the grave diggers' registry book, an unidentified male buried May 30 was received not from a hospital but directly from the Sabah al-Salem police station. When I asked at the station about him, I was told variously that he was a drug addict and a car accident victim, but there was no plausible explanation of why the body was not first brought to a hospital morgue. Interviews with three Palestinians and one Iraqi provided a glimpse of what might have happened. Arrested in mid-May and brought to the Sabah al-Salem police station, they were put through a routine so well orchestrated the officers had names for the torture chambers. The youths said that after questioning -- ""How many Kuwaiti girls did you rape? How many Kuwaiti officers did you turn in to the Iraqis?"" -- they were led through what the police called the party room, barbecue room and drinking juice room. In each, they said, at least a dozen uniformed troops tortured them: beatings with sticks and poles; electric shocks and burns with cigarettes and heated rods, and forced drinking of what smelled like sewage water. Who is responsible for the deaths of the 54 in al-Riqqa cemetery? That the killings appear to have occurred since March 6, after the first wave of private vengeance killings following liberation had largely subsided, suggests that organized forces are to blame. So might the large number of unidentified dead in a country where, since liberation, the proliferation of checkpoints makes leaving home without identity papers unthinkable. A series of documented post-liberation killings of people in police and military custody substantiates this view. One Palestinian man arrested in early March and held in the military detention facility for one month told me of 11 prisoners killed by torture. I was able to confirm at least three other cases of Palestinians murdered in police or military custody. In an important speech on May 26, Crown Prince Sheik Saad al-Abdallah acknowledged for the first time that prisoners were being mistreated, and vowed to prosecute those responsible. To fulfill this pledge, he should begin by ordering an investigation into the bodies at al-Riqqa cemetery. Independent forensic scientists, accompanied by expert international observers, should exhume the graves to determine the cause of death. Hospital records should be examined to ascertain which bodies came from police stations or other detention facilities. Security officers found responsible for abuses should be arrested and vigorously prosecuted. The mass graves at al-Riqqa cemetery clearly do not reflect the full extent of the killing in liberated Kuwait; some victims have been identified and given individual burials, while others may be buried elsewhere. But the cemetery is a critical starting point for confronting the official violence that has left many non-Kuwaiti residents, particularly the Palestinian community, terrified. As Kuwait rebuilds, a top priority should be the establishment of a system of accountability that would bring to justice those responsible for these abuses, allow victims' families to confirm the fate of their loved ones, and begin to stem the cycle of violence and recrimination that threatens to tear the nation apart."
