"A former Foreign Minister of the Netherlands who has been monitoring human rights in Iraq told a United Nations Commission today that over the last year President Saddam Hussein made an already grave situation ""heinous"" for Iraqis through officially sanctioned amputations, maiming and branding of dissidents and military deserters. ""It is simply shocking that near the end of the 20th century, any state should so publicly and unashamedly incorporate heinous practices into its law,"" said the former Dutch Foreign Minister, Max van der Stoel. He said that such practices, which threaten many thousands of Iraqis arrested for both petty crimes and political opposition are ""absolutely outlawed"" under international conventions. The series of laws mandating physical punishment was enacted in the summer and fall of 1994. He also said that the Iraqi Government was refusing to cooperate with the United Nations in making use of available options to sell some oil in order to buy medicine and food for people suffering from an international trade embargo. President Hussein has used examples of sick and undernourished children to gain support for lifting sanctions. Speaking to reporters after his speech to the Commission, Mr. van der Stoel, one of more than a dozen special envoys directed by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights to report on countries with serious violations, said Iraq was among ""the worst offenders of human rights since the Second World War."" Mr. van der Stoel has not been permitted to visit Iraq to write his reports, the most recent of which was submitted to the Human Rights Commission less than two weeks ago. He relies on material published in official Iraqi gazettes and information collected from Iraqis who have fled or who have managed to smuggle out of the country video tapes purporting to document abuses. One tape pictured an army deserter with his ears cut off and blood still flowing on his face. Others show people whose foreheads had been branded with an X to indicate guilt, most often in cases where other mutilation had been done. Mr. van der Stoel said he believed ""tens of thousands"" of military deserters or draft evaders lived in fear of torture and amputation under laws that can be applied retroactively. He said that doctors who complain about brutality are often persecuted for their outspokenness. Occasionally there are reports of children being maimed along with their parents. Echoing remarks in reports from the United Nations Commission established to dismantle Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, Mr. van der Stoel said the Iraqis engaged in evasive techniques and used ""threadbare"" arguments to avoid acting on international criticism. The Human Rights Commission, now in the final weeks of a long session that began at the end of January and will continue until March 10, has no power to impose punishment on Iraq. But President Hussein's human rights record is used in the Security Council by members opposed to easing any sanctions on Baghdad. The United States and Britain argue that all aspects of Iraqi behavior should be taken into account, while France and Russia make the case for gradual lifting of sanctions as Iraq meets certain criteria not involving human rights. The issue will be central to a Security Council debate on Iraq in April. Mr. van der Stoel said countries wanting to establish economic ties to Baghdad had a ""special responsibility"" to consider violations."
