"Cornered and desperate, Saddam Hussein now lashes out against diplomacy itself. His troops lawlessly threaten foreign embassies in Kuwait while his regime detains U.S. diplomats and dependents who were promised a safe exit from Baghdad. The most telling condemnation comes from Moscow, Iraq's longtime ally. An outraged Mikhail Gorbachev warns that an Iraqi failure to heed United Nations resolutions would ''inevitably compel the Security Council to adopt appropriate additional measures.'' Those measures need no spelling out. The Soviet Union is now weighing a Security Council resolution that would authorize use of force to secure compliance with economic sanctions. Americans who have been struggling to win Soviet approval have gained unexpected support from Saddam Hussein. Each fresh breach of law solidifies the global consensus against him. Cumulatively, he and his associates are becoming war criminals in the classic Nuremberg sense. In a decade, Iraq has managed to violate most of the Nuremberg Principles as formulated in 1945 by the Allies in World War II and reaffirmed unanimously by the U.N. in 1950. In law if not yet in fact, the Baghdad leadership could be held criminally accountable for Iraq's offenses. The Nuremberg Principles assert that a crime against world law is liable to punishment, that heads of state can be held responsible and that obeying orders does not exempt subordinates when a moral choice is possible. These are punishable crimes: Crimes against peace, like initiating a war of aggression in violation of international treaties. Iraq initiated war against Iran in 1980, and against Kuwait 23 days ago. War crimes, like the ill treatment of civilian populations in occupied territories, killing of hostages, plunder of private property or wanton destruction of cities. Iraq plundered Kuwait, stripped its people of their citizenship, abused innocent civilians and now makes hostages even of diplomats whose special status is protected by the Vienna Convention. Crimes against humanity, like murder, deportation and inhuman acts or persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds. It is a capital offense in Iraq to insult the President, espouse Zionism, leave the ruling Baath Party or persuade someone else to do so. Using these laws, Iraq has executed thousands. It has waged genocidal war against its own Kurdish minority, using poison gas in contravention of a Geneva protocol to which it is a party. There is hardly a human rights convention that Iraq has not violated. The chief defense of war criminals tried at Nuremberg in 1945-46 was that no precedent existed for their punishment. It does now."
