"An Egyptian human rights group charges that torture and sexual abuse of prisoners has become so widespread that it ''now appears to be a matter of policy by security forces'' holding those detained both for political and nonpolitical reasons. The report by the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, published on Saturday, was drawn up before President Hosni Mubarak last week dismissed Interior Minister Zaki Badr, who is known for his tough handling of dissent. His successor, Mohammed Abdel-Halim Musa, has said that the change of minister does not mean a change of policy, suggesting that Egypt will continue to crack down hard on violent opponents, including clandestine cells of Islamic militants. No Official Response Neither Mr. Musa nor other Government agencies offered any comment on the human rights report, which said that the security forces used whips, electric prods and electric shock treatment to sensitive parts of suspects' bodies, as well as water hoses, to extract confessions. It said torture had become routine, adding: ''The use of torture has become widespread to the point that it now appears to be a matter of policy by the security forces.'' Routinely, it said, detainees were beaten immediately on arrival at police stations or prisons, and the practice has become known as ''one of the rites greeting political prisoners on arrival in prison.'' Furthermore, the report said, torture has been inflicted on ''not only members of political trends but also on ordinary citizens.'' Criticism From the West Western human rights organizations complained in 1989 of the increased use of torture in Egypt, which likes to cast itself as an open society compared to much of the Arab world. The report was the first documented Egyptian criticism of the country's human rights record amid the recent clamor of foreign accusations. The authorities had denied those assertions. Egypt is the most populous nation in the Arab world, with about 55 million people, and the most important Arab ally of the United States in regional diplomacy. It receives about $2.3 billion in American assistance each year, including $1.5 billion in military aid."
