"To the Editor: Since returning from the West Bank and Gaza in February, our Physicians for Human Rights delegation has directed much effort toward American Jewish groups that share our concern that Israel is violating its own Western democratic standards by grossly unfair treatment of the Arabs in the occupied territories. Jewish settlements in Judea and Samaria carry with them Israeli law and the civil and human rights implied in that law. While across the street from Jewish settlements, Arabs are subjected to arbitrary and capricious application of a variety of laws derived from Ottoman, Jordanian and British mandate law and 1,200 Army regulations, under which they have been persecuted and humiliated at least since 1979. We welcome those American Arabs who join with us in protest against what our fellow Jews are doing. Tyranny and oppression are easy modes to slip into and even easier to rationalize. ''We are at war. Rock throwing is just the tip of the iceberg. They are trying to throw us into the sea.'' We have been told by many Jewish groups and by representatives of the Israeli Government that our criticism of Israeli behavior in the territories helps Israel's enemies. That may be true, but we have to weigh help to Israel's (militarily ineffective) enemies against the gross violations of human decency we witnessed on our human-rights mission. In response to our report, Israeli Government representatives pointed out that conditions in the West Bank and Gaza were significantly better than what the Israelis found when they took over from Jordan and Egypt in 1968, claims corroborated by the Palestinians themselves. Our response is that the significance of Israel and its claim to the loyalty of American Jews and to the American public lie not in its ability to be paternalistic toward Arabs but in its commitment to Western democratic values and traditions. The failure to extend basic human and civil rights to the Arabs in the occupied territories after 20 years of occupation is morally incomprehensible. At the same time that we and our moderate Arab colleagues condemn Israeli human-rights policies, it is important to point out that there is little outcry about even more egregious human-rights violations by the Arab states against these same Palestinian victims. It would make the effort of American Jews trying to affect human-rights policy more credible to the Israelis if similar protests were mounted by American Arabs against the even more unacceptable behavior of the Arab states. They can count on our help. LEON N. SHAPIRO, M.D.   Chestnut Hill, Mass., May 18, 1988 The writer is on the staff of Harvard Medical School."
