"As the Soviet Union's occupation of Afghanistan heads into its seventh year, the Immigration and Naturalization Service is putting our country in the embarrassing and inconsistent position of jailing some of the Afghan refugees whose cause we support, both politically and financially. The President, Congress, the State Department and human rights monitoring groups regularly denounce Soviet atrocities against the Afghan people. Yet barely a murmur can be heard about the 33 Afghans being held by the Immigration Service in a New York City detention facility. These bona fide refugees are the victims of the Soviet aggression in Afghanistan. Many of them have actively participated in the resistance movement; many were imprisoned and tortured by their Government. All have asked for political asylum in our country -and face deportation if it is denied. The Immigration Service keeps these people in jail for one reason only - that they failed to ask their puppet Government for permission to escape their beleaguered homeland and therefore did not have proper documentation when they entered the United States. This is a stubborn and inflexible policy that goes far beyond what is required by law. Indeed, the Immigration Service has failed to exercise the discretion accorded it by immigration law - the discretion, in exceptional circumstances, to permit the entrance of individuals who may otherwise find themselves unable to secure protection within American borders. The Service's absolute refusal, in this case, to exercise any such discretion recalls the case of the St. Louis, a ship that the United States turned away from its shores in 1939, refusing haven to hundreds of desperate refugees from Hitler's Germany. Most of the refugees eventually perished, to our eternal disgrace - and yet we seem to have learned nothing from the experience. What happens to the Afghans we deport? Often they are returned to Pakistan, where they risk jail, trial or deportation to Afghanistan. In some cases, we have deported Afghans with no clear destination - with the result that they are bounced from country to country. The Immigration Service closes its eyes to the fact that they may be forced back into Afghanistan, where they could be imprisoned, tortured or executed. There is no doubt in anyone's mind about what is happening in Afghanistan. Our Government, several human rights groups (including Helsinki Watch, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights and Amnesty International), many individual journalists and impartial observers have thoroughly documented the extensive human rights violations there - atrocities that have been called genocide. To read these reports is a nerve-shattering experience. To read them with the knowledge that our own Government is jailing people who escaped this tyranny is to feel a deep sense of shame. Several of the 33 Afghans incarcerated in New York have been languishing in an American detention facility for as long as 17 months. Is this the America we want them to know? Is this the America that is synonymous with hope and freedom? It is time to put an end to their ordeal. The President himself should use his authority to release these Afghans from detention. That would be the way to do justice to the Afghan cause and to the democratic values we espouse. Several of the detained Afghans have written to me, asking how they could be jailed in the ''land of Lady Liberty.'' One detainee who is 16 years old has gone so far as to renounce his application for asylum in America. His words should be shocking to all Americans: ''From this jail and the mental torture I have been put through, it has become clear to me that what I had heard about the United States and what we had hoped for and what they promised us and announced to the world is not anything other than a dream. . . . The United States will never extend a helping hand to me. I feel that I will never be free nor be granted political asylum. Since there is no hope for me here, I give up my case and request that I be sent back to our beloved and invaded country under the Russian torture.'' His words are as sobering as the Soviet invasion itself."
