"To the Editor:  In covering the recent terrorist bus hijacking in Israel, your correspondent David K. Shipler wrote: ''Although some Israelis have deplored the possibility that one or two of the hijackers were killed after capture, many others have expressed satisfaction, arguing that terrorists who take hostages should be killed, preferably after being tortured. Such comments can be heard on buses and in supermarkets'' (news story April 30). Does he really consider that such remarks represent the sober views of mainstream Israelis or their Government? If he were covering a brutal murder, rape or kidnapping in America, would he write that neighbors were heard to say of the accused: ''They should be boiled in oil. . . . They should be horsewhipped. . . . They don't even deserve a trial,'' and the like? Does the anonymous hyperbole circulating on the streets of a democracy in the aftermath of brutal terror warrant extensive coverage? Not really. I have not the slightest doubt that the vast majority of Israelis wish to see justice done in this case and legality applied - even on behalf of the terrorists they would like to see ''tortured.'' The problem is that, even as Israel investigates the charges, the world continues to demand of Israel a standard of morality and ethics to which none of her Arab enemies are even minimally held accountable.  Has President Assad of Syria investigated Amnesty International's report that the Syrian Army massacred 40,000 of its citizens last year? Has the Government of Lebanon ever brought to trial the perpetrators of Shatila and Sabra? Has Yasir Arafat begun an investigation into the bus hijacking to determine why his criminal gang took civilians hostage and threatened to blow them up? When reports first broke, Arafat applauded the terrorist action and sought credit for it.  Israel, as the Middle East's last surviving world-class democracy, has allowed correspondents to turn their microscopes on its society. For that alone, it deserves the courtesy of fairness which its enemies enjoy simply by denying correspondents the freedom they take for granted in Israel. (Rabbi) DOV AHARONI-FISCH Executive Director Herut Zionists of America New York, May 3, 1984"
