"Frustrated by its inability to stanch a rising tide of violence by Islamic militants, the Egyptian Government has unleashed its security forces in a blood-letting and a wave of detentions not seen in Egypt since the assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981. The campaign appears to be aimed not only at the militant Islamic Group, but also at the established, officially tolerated Muslim Brotherhood, which says it does not sanction the use of force. But it was only under prodding by Interior Minister Abdel-Halim Moussa that the Muslim Brotherhood today condemned attacks against tourists and Government officials. Police State or Civil Unrest? The confrontation signals the administration's resolve to curtail or shut down any Muslim group that appears to be politically inclined. Egyptian officials say that one mistake made by the Government in Algeria, currently battling a powerful Islamic militant movement, was in permitting politically motivated Islamic groups to exist at all, even in the guise of charities or labor unions. Security forces have killed at least 29 people in March, compared with 87 in the preceding 11 months. Hundreds of suspects have been imprisoned. With the Government now essentially at war with the militants, there appears to be no hope of conciliation between the administration of President Hosni Mubarak and more moderate Muslim groups. If the crackdown fails, the stability of the state will be in jeopardy. ""We are faced now with two alternatives,"" said Hala Mostapha, who has written a book on the fundamentalist movement. ""Either we become a police state and step back from the democratic advances that have been made, or we descend into disorder and perhaps civil war."" 'We Have No Alternative' In one of several harsh human rights reports to come out in the past few weeks, Amnesty International says Egyptian authorities have handed the police an ""official license to kill with impunity"" all suspected militants. ""We don't want this confrontation, but we have no alternative,"" said an Interior Ministry official, Brig. Gen. Baheddine Ibrahim. ""Either there is a state or there is not. We will fight them until we crush them. We have no other choice."" The Government has stripped leaders of the Muslim Brotherhood from control of the country's professional unions, has passed tough new anti-terrorism laws and has begun to haul dozens of suspects into military courts, where the penalty for association with ""terrorist groups"" is death by hanging. ""This is not just a campaign against Muslim militants,"" said Essam al-Iryan, a leader in the Muslim Brotherhood, ""but a campaign against democratic representation and freedom in Egypt."" The Government disputes the Muslim Brotherhood's claim that democratic values would be upheld in the Islamic state envisioned by the militants. A City of Slayings The flash point is now in the sprawling city of Asyut, 200 miles south of Cairo, where there are almost daily clashes between armed Muslim radicals and the police. Government officials are gunned down in their cars or outside their houses or offices. Coptic Christians, who form 10 percent of the national population and have a large community in Asyut, also have been murdered and their shops and houses have been burned. Many have fled to Cairo. But few cities in Egypt have been immune to the violence. The police response is often heavy. In nighttime raids on suspected militant havens, they often attack with several hundred men, many armed with heavy machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades. But the increasing brutality of the police, who routinely beat even common criminals, and the misery and unemployment common in all Egyptian cities, garners the militants widespread sympathy, if not outright support. Mohammed Abdel Hazim al-Sayih, 22, a student at Asyut University, was attracted as a teen-ager to the Islamic Group's call for a pure Islamic state, one that would end the repression and corruption that has benefited a few Government officials and has left most Egyptians struggling. But it was not until late one night three years ago, when the police burst into his family's apartment and hauled him away, that he knew he wanted to dedicate his life to creating a new Egypt. Hardened by Police Brutality ""They stripped me and beat me with their fists and wooden clubs,"" he said. ""They insulted me. And then they gave me electric shocks. They kept asking me the names of my friends. All the time the only thing they accomplished was to convince me that the Islamic Group was right."" The amount of firepower now employed against the militants, who are themselves well-armed with automatic weapons and grenades, has only strengthened the impression that the movement commands enough force to challenge the Government. Whole neighborhoods bear the scars of such confrontations. The squalid brick and concrete buildings along Abu Bakir Sadiq Street in Asyut are pockmarked with bullet holes. The residents, mostly laborers, were jolted out of bed in the predawn hours on March 17 by the thunder of automatic weapons fire directed at a small apartment block that housed a cell of militants. The fighting left 10 militants and 2 officers dead and 24 policemen wounded. Heavy-Handed Propaganda The police raids have coincided with a heavy-handed propaganda campaign. The state-run television has begun a daily broadcast called ""No to Terrorism,"" which features street interviews with Egyptians who condemn the acts of the militants. The nightly news features wounded policemen, including one who was dying of severe burns after a firebomb attack. But critics say the campaign is stilted and fails to counter the militants' basic criticism: that the ruling party, which has held power since 1952, cares only for its own enrichment and power. ""The militants say the Government is corrupt and repressive,"" said a Western diplomat, ""and as long as the Government ignores these charges, which are largely true, they will fail to garner much support. Not many people care if policemen get shot."" While many agree that the Government campaign may weaken the militants in the short term, they also believe that without serious democratic and economic reforms, the violence will intensify. But the Government's response has been in the opposite direction. When it adopted a new anti-terrorism program in November, the Government denied the militants access to the judicial system, shunting their cases to military courts. Trial as Theater Inside a military base in Haiksteep, along a desert road outside Cairo, three blue police vans with air slits on the side panels and the back doors padlocked, ferried 43 militants through the gates. The men are on trial for attacks on tourists. If convicted they will be put to death. Others have been condemned in earlier trials, though none have been executed. The robed and bearded prisoners are being tried in a converted theater -- and theater is what the trial has become. From the moment the court session opened on March 9, the suspects, crammed in a black metal cage that runs along the left wall, have called out to spectators and refused to honor the decorum of the court. The trial, meant by the Government to show its resolve, has became a fiasco. Mocking court officials, prisoners pull up their robes to show scars they say were caused by electric shocks and beatings. ""Every two months I am taken from my cell,"" said Hussein Sayid Ali, as he peered through the bars of the cage. ""I am given electric shocks and hung by my hands from the ceiling. This Government will not last. It uses torture to stay in power. It permits prostitution and drinking, while it imprisons Muslims. We are ready to die to implement the pure Islamic state."" Foreign reporters were banned from the proceedings last week and on Monday the defense lawyers walked out, accusing authorities of orchestrating a show trial. Many militants see the months ahead as a time of great sacrifice and steely commitment. In an eerie stand-off in Asyut on March 23, 3,000 fundamentalists, resplendent in freshly laundered white robes and carefully washed and barbered beards, gathered to celebrate the end of the holy month of Ramadan. Defying anti-terrorist laws that call for the death penalty for anyone associated with militants, many wore green badges identifying themselves as members of the outlawed Islamic Group. They marched solemnly through the streets chanting Islamic slogans, their voices echoing to balconies and windows filled with the faces of people unused to such public defiance. Seven pickup trucks, loaded with police carrying automatic rifles, followed the procession. Groups of plainclothesmen, many carrying walkie-talkies, watched nervously. Hours later, leaflets were distributed around the city, signed by Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the spiritual leader of the Islamic Group, now in self-imposed exile in Jersey City. Several of his followers have been linked by investigators in the United States with the bombing of the World Trade Center. ""My meeting with God is nearing,"" the leaflets read. ""To my beloved people: I tell you with tears in my eyes to say no to injustice. May my blood carve out these words for you. Do not weaken. Do not rest. Punish the rulers as you have been punished, and know that God is with you."" Map of Egypt showing location of Asyut. (pg. A6)"
