"Freedom for political speech has broader support in this country than ever before, I believe. Past repression of unpopular speakers seems anomalous today. One thing on which most conservatives and liberals now agree is respect for the First Amendment. But not the U.S. Department of Justice. Not, at least, if one goes by an astonishing brief the Department has just filed. In the teeth of precedent and logic, it argues that immigrants in this country have only as much freedom of speech as the Government considers reasonable -- and can be deported if they cross that vague line. The brief was filed in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals in a seven-year-old deportation case against two Palestinians. It is the latest turn in a proceeding that is a model of how our Government should not behave. Eight men and women of Palestinian origin, living in California, were arrested in 1987, held in shackles and described as ""terrorists."" The Immigration and Naturalization Service charged them with advocating ""world Communism"" -- but later dropped that charge. The real problem of the eight was that they had raised money for the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, a radical group. The P.F.L.P. has carried out terrorism, but it also conducts peaceful political and relief activities. Judge William Webster, then Director of the F.B.I., told Congress in 1987 that the eight had ""not been found to have engaged themselves in terroristic activities."" Contributing money for peaceful purposes to a group that also engages in violence is plainly protected by the First Amendment. Many Americans gave money to the Nicaraguan contras, and they could certainly not be prosecuted. Nevertheless the Immigration Service moved to deport Khader Hamide and Michel Shehadeh, who were lawfully in this country as permanent residents, under a 1990 law allowing deportation of those who support an organization ""in conducting a terrorist activity."" Many experts in immigration law protested that that language did not cover what these two men had done, but the I.N.S. persisted. The I.N.S. sought to deport the six others for technical violations. It said, for example, that one who had a student visa failed to take enough credits one year. But an I.N.S. lawyer said the use of such grounds was just ""tactical""; the real reason to expel them was their association with the P.F.L.P. The Palestinians asked a Federal court to block the deportation proceedings as selective, political enforcement of the law. Federal Judge Stephen V. Wilson, a Reagan appointee, granted that request for the six. He refused it in the case against Mr. Hamide and Mr. Shehadeh because their deportation proceeding had already begun, though he said the Government appeared to base its charges against them on constitutionally protected activities. The two sides appealed Judge Wilson's decisions. In its briefs, the Justice Department says that the First Amendment does apply to immigrants -- but has to be read in a way that is ""deferential to the Executive."" In other words, the Government can decide to select people for deportation because it does not like their beliefs or associations. To that end the Department argues that immigrants lawfully in the United States have no more rights than outsiders trying to get in. But over many years the Supreme Court has drawn a sharp line between the two, saying that aliens seeking entry have no rights while, once here, every person is entitled to due process of law, free speech and other constitutional protections. For the United States Government to deny that established law seems to me scandalous. Under the Government's tortured view of the terrorism clause in immigration law, it can deport any immigrant who contributed to Nelson Mandela's speaking tour here, to the contras or to other groups that have engaged in guerrilla activity as well as politics. That adds up to thousands of people. But the only cases brought in the four years of this law are against these Palestinians. It is especially disappointing that Bill Clinton's Justice Department has decided to push these deportations. There is not even a colorable political reason. The Red-hunting age is happily past, and Israel has just allowed members of the P.F.L.P. to enter Gaza. It is time -- long past time -- to drop these embarrassing cases."
