"A committee of the United Nations General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to condemn Iraq for human rights violations in occupied Kuwait and agreed that the United Nations should continue monitoring Iraq's behavior in the territories it has seized. The resolution was supported by 132 members of the Assembly committee that deals with social, humanitarian and cultural affairs. Iraq cast the sole vote against it, while Zambia abstained. The measure now goes to the full 159-nation General Assembly. The resolution condemned Iraq for ""serious violations of human rights"" in Kuwait, including ""torture, arrests, summary executions, disappearances and abduction"" since Iraq invaded Kuwait Aug. 2. It provides for continued international monitoring of Iraq's behavior in Kuwait by the United Nations Human Rights Commission and by the committee itself. Legal Issues Addressed The resolution also addressed several international legal issues that have arisen as a result of the invasion. Because Iraq considers Kuwait part of its territory, Baghdad has said it is not bound by the 1949 Geneva Conventions, which define the rights of civilians in zones of military occupation as well as of prisoners of war, giving the International Committee of the Red Cross the task of monitoring compliance. The Security Council, whose decisions are binding in international law, has already ruled that the Fourth Geneva Convention dealing with the rights of civilians applies to everyone in Kuwait. The committee resolution today affirmed that point. Some international lawyers have also sought a Security Council ruling saying the estimated 1,000 Kuwaiti soldiers captured by Iraq during the invasion are prisoners of war and subject to the provisions of the Third Geneva Convention of 1949. Originally, Kuwait's Government in exile planned to ask the Council for such a ruling. But when the Council agreed last week to authorize the use of force to expel Iraq from Kuwait after Jan. 15, it also promised to take no further action against Baghdad during a ""pause of good will"" through that date. The committee resolution supported today urges Iraq to treat all captured Kuwaiti soldiers ""in accordance with the internationally recognized principles of humanitarian law,"" a reference to the Third Geneva Convention governing prisoners of war. So far Iraq has refused to notify the Red Cross of the names of these P.O.W.'s, as it is bound to do, or to concede them any of their other rights."
