"A Turkish court has sentenced eight Kurdish members of Parliament to prison for doing what representatives in a democracy are supposed to do -- speaking out in behalf of their constituents. Washington was right to protest this gross injustice. It is a stain on Turkey's human rights record. Even worse, it is a blow to Turkish democracy. It violates the principle of parliamentary immunity that is essential to representative government. It also threatens to polarize Turkish politics by driving Kurdish dissent out of normal political channels and into the violent arms of Kurdish separatists. Only a prompt pardon by Turkey's President, Suleyman Demirel, and the return of the legislators to Parliament could undo some of the damage. Washington would be wise to seek that. Many of the country's 15 million Kurds are integrated into Turkish society, but those who have sought to maintain their ethnic identity have faced discrimination and worse. The Kurdish language is banned; Kurdish human rights workers and journalists have been the victims of death squads. Others have ""disappeared"" while in the custody of security forces. The Government has turned its Kurdish policy over to the army, which is seeking a purely military solution. In its war on Kurdish separatists it has turned southeastern Turkey into a killing field, destroying villages and driving out the civilian population. The main effect of this misguided strategy has been to generate recruits for separatism and radicalize Kurds who want nothing more than their rights as citizens. Instead of seeking political accommodation with the Kurds, the Government banned the Democracy Party, which draws on Kurds for support. Seven of its elected deputies, along with one independent, were arrested and held in preventive detention on trumped-up charges. None were accused of acts of violence, and only one of any act at all -- allegedly giving shelter to five members of the separatist Kurdistan Workers Party, or P.K.K. Their main offense was saying things the military and the Government preferred not to hear. After a procedurally tainted trial, the eight are now being sent to prison, some for 15 years. Ankara needs to correct this injustice and change its ill-conceived course."
