"International    A3-16 The United States and its allies demanded that Iraq end all aircraft and helicopter flights over southern Iraq within 24 hours. They said the ban was needed to halt Iraqi repression of the region's large and dissident Shiite population.  A1 Exiled Shiites and several experts say the Shiites of southern Iraq are looking for a greater role in governing Iraq, not a separate state.  A14 Baghdad says it's ready to go to war but leaves room for a solution.  A14 Israelis wrestle with the possibility of Iraqi Scud attacks.  A15 A long and poignant Jewish cultural history is beginning to disappear in Ukraine, leaders of Jewish groups say. The reason is not discrimination but freedom and assimilation.  A3 Neo-Nazi violence erupted again in the German port of Rostock, where police officers battled stone-throwing youths at a hostel for foreign refugees.  A6 A conference on the crisis in former Yugoslav republics opened in London to rousing condemnation of the Serbs by nearly two dozen nations. But there were virtually no calls for action beyond tightening sanctions and sending observers. A1 A State Department official says he resigned in protest over the Bush Administration's ""ineffective"" response to the fighting in the former Yugoslavia. He said the United States had a moral obligation to end the ""genocide"" in Bosnia.  A10 Amid signs of a willingness to compromise, Israelis and Palestinians dickered in Washington over the powers of a proposed council or assembly through which the Palestinians would rule themselves.  A8 A powerful bomb exploded in a packed Algiers airport terminal, killing 9 people and wounding more than 100. It was the first terrorist attack in a wave of violence that began with a crackdown on Muslim fundamentalists in January.  A5 Pakistan appeals for a cease-fire in the battered Afghan capital.  A16 Toronto Journal: Canadians are suddenly fascinated by Mexico.  A4 The I.M.F. has encouraging words for Russia's economic reforms.A11 National    A18-21, B7-9 Taking its second shot at the American mainland, Hurricane Andrew brought widespread destruction to southern Louisiana's oil towns and Cajun country.  A1 Efforts to deliver relief supplies to Miami were slowed.  B9 Only now are residents returning to Key Biscayne.  B9 A Federal relief agency is faced with an enormous task.  B8 Many of the officers in the 29 police departments that serve Dade County are squeezed by a wrenching psychological bind. Professionally they are symbols of order at a chaotic time. Personally they are victims of that same chaos.  A1 The trial of Clair E. George, the former C.I.A. official charged with lying about the Iran-contra affair, ended in a hung jury. The prosecution said he would be retried.  A1 A researcher reported that babies as young as 5 months have a rudimentary ability to add numbers and subtract them.  A1 The nation's most besieged charity chose as its new president Elaine L. Chao, Peace Corps director.  A18 College-bound high school seniors scored slightly higher on the Scholastic Aptitude Test this year than last, the first annual improvement for combined verbal and mathematics scores since 1985.  A18 The Bush campaign is now trying to shift the subject away from family values, or at least soften the tone of the discussion.  A20 Clinton backed Bush's decision on a no-fly zone in Iraq.  A20 Edwards, eight-term Congressman, was beaten at the polls.  A20 A large clinical test found that AIDS patients who take AZT could benefit significantly by switching after several months to another medication, didanosine.  B7 A former Dallas minister agreed not to fight extradition from California to Texas, where he has been charged with trying to murder his wife five years ago. A21 A judge and a prosecutor clashed over a Los Angeles riot case.  A18 Metro Digest    B1 In what the police called one of the most ferocious shootouts in New York City in recent years, gunmen drove up to a Bronx apartment building and opened fire, wounding 12 people, many of whom then crawled frantically for cover because they feared being shot again.  A1 Home Section    C1-12 The sport of yard-saling, scored by hits or misses.  C1 In the 1950's with Dan Wakefield.  C1 Feeling at home at the office.  C1 Growing C2 Garden Q. & A.  C5 Desks a writer can lean on.  C8 Beyond the legend: Stanford White's New York.  C11 Parent & Child C12 Arts/Entertainment    C14-24 John Cage's music of questions.  C17 Jimmy Cliff's reggae for the arena.  C17 Has Mostly Mozart worn out its welcome?  C17 How the BBC learns to say it right.  C20 Theater: ""Anna Karenina."" C17 Word and Image: Home Video C22 ""The Turning Point,"" on abstract artists.  C22 Obituaries    D20 Emanuel P. Popolizio, former Housing Authority chief. Frederick O'Neal, actor and former Equity president. Sports    B10-16 Baseball: Yanks sweep Brewers.  B11 Hillman makes fast work of Giants.  B13 Column: Smith on baseball's legal wrangling.  B11 Football: Howard signs with Giants.  B11 Jets' Moore is back.  B14 Tennis: Players rally around Ashe.  B11 Business Digest    D1 Editorials/Op-Ed    A22-23 Editorials George Kenney's message. Clair George's trial, and retrial. Better schools: Mr. Bush's choice. Topics: Got it. Letters William Safire: God bless us. Leslie H. Gelb: The awful choice on Bosnia. Cokie Roberts: Divided government is the best revenge. Grace Mirabella: Cookies and code words."
