"Israel said today that it saw no merit in the United States' assertion that there had been ''a substantial increase in human rights violations'' as a result of Israel's response to the Palestinian uprising in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. In its annual report on human rights practices around the world, the State Department said Israeli troops had caused ''many avoidable deaths and injuries'' by firing on Palestinians in the occupied territories. [Excerpts from the report, page A8.] The department also reported that there had been ''remarkable changes'' in the Soviet Union, including a ''quantum leap'' toward greater toleration of political demonstrations and unauthorized meetings. But it said the changes are precarious because they have not been translated into new laws, regulations or bureaucratic procedures. 'Proper Conduct' Asserted Responding to the American document today, Israel's Deputy Foreign Minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, defended the actions of his country's soldiers. He said on Israeli television, according to a report carried by The Associated Press, that Israeli troops ''maintain as best they can, apart from a few exceptions, the standards of proper conduct that no country in the world could maintain.'' Yossi Gal, a spokesman at the Israeli Embassy here, said Israeli soldiers in the occupied territories were ''facing daily provocations and violent riots involving Molotov cocktails, rocks, firebombs and other lethal weapons.'' James J. Zogby, executive director of the Arab American Institute, which represents United States citizens of Arab descent, welcomed the American rights document. ''For the first time in 12 years of reporting, the State Department has fulfilled its mandate to tell the truth,'' he said. He called on Congress to withhold aid from Israel until human rights violations ended. The Israelis are the largest recipient of American aid, now receiving $3 billion a year. So far, there is no sign that Congressional support for such aid has been seriously undermined by concern about Israel's handling of the uprising. In its summation of events in the occupied territories, the report said ''366 Palestinians were killed in 1988 as a result of the uprising,'' most of them by the Israeli Defense Forces and some by Israeli settlers. ''Over 20,000 Palestinians were wounded or injured by the I.D.F.,'' it said. ''The Israeli Defense Forces, caught by surprise and untrained and inexperienced in riot control, responded in a manner which led to a substantial increase in human rights violations,'' the report said. It also cited the demolition of the houses of 108 Arabs accused but not convicted of ''involvement in security incidents.'' Liberalization by Moscow Assessing human rights in the Soviet Union, the State Department document said that by the end of 1988, all prisoners had been freed who were ''sentenced under articles of the criminal codes which punish dissenting political or unauthorized religious activity.'' It said ''the limits of permissible dissent'' continued to expand in the Soviet Union, although ''many Soviet prisoners suffer both mental and physical abuse and mistreatment during interrogation, trial and confinement.'' ''Moscow cracked down on the Armenian national movement'' at the end of last year, but respect for human rights in the Soviet Baltic republics ''improved markedly'' in 1988, the State Department said. For example, it said, the authorities tolerated ''unprecedented public expressions of Estonian national sentiment,'' large public demonstrations in Latvia and a rally attended by perhaps 500,000 people in Lithuania. Nevertheless, in an introduction to the report, Richard Schifter, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, said the Soviet Union still needed ''institutional guarantees to protect the rights of the individual against unbridled state authority.'' Here is a summary of findings in the State Department report. ''The human rights situation in South Africa continued to deteriorate in 1988 as the Government took additional harsh measures'' against opponents of apartheid. At the end of last year, about 1,500 people were being held without charges, including hundreds detained since a state of emergency was proclaimed in 1986. South African security forces or their right-wing sympathizers are ''suspected of involvement'' in the killing of Dulcie September, the Paris representative of the African National Congress, and in an attempt on the life of Albie Sachs, a white South African lawyer who has actively opposed apartheid. 'Torture' in Ethiopia In Ethiopia, ''torture has been used against members of most opposition groups,'' including rebels from the northern provinces of Eritrea and Tigre. ''Common methods of torture included prolonged beating on the soles of the feet, prolonged suspension from a rope in a contorted position, death threats, mock executions, sleep deprivation and submergence to the point of unconsciousness in tanks of dirty water.'' ''There is no freedom of speech or press in Ethiopia,'' the report said. In the southern Sudan, reliable reports indicate that 100,000 to 250,000 civilians died from starvation after Government forces and guerrillas blocked efforts to deliver food to areas controlled by the other side. In Somalia, the internal security agency and the military police ''often torture detainees.'' In 1988, ''there was some improvement in the human rights situation in China, but also some important setbacks.'' In Tibet, ''beatings and other forms of mistreatment, including the use of electric prods, were common among those detained following protests'' by thousands of people seeking independence from China, it charged. Beijing maintains an official policy encouraging one-child families, but a resurgence in birthrates suggests that enforcement of the policy through coercion has decreased. Instead, the policy seems to be enforced through social pressures and economic incentives. In the Philippines, ''there were signs of deterioration in the human rights situation in 1988,'' even though President Corazon C. Aquino often stated her commitment to respect such rights. ''There is credible evidence that some members of the police and the military have resorted to extra-legal killing to combat'' Communist insurgents and their sympathizers, the report said. ''Systematic violations of human rights'' were said to continue in North Korea, Cambodia and Laos. In Burma, Government security forces ''systematically killed and detained student demonstrators'' seeking democracy and free elections. American observers estimated that 1,000 people may have been killed when Government troops opened fire on peaceful protesters in Rangoon in September. In Chile, human rights are still severely restricted after voters spurned Gen. Augusto Pinochet in ''a free and fair plebiscite.'' People are arbitrarily arrested under ''vaguely defined and far-reaching state security laws.'' In 1988, as in the past, there were reliable ''reports of torture and mistreatment of persons detained by security forces.'' ''Torture remains one of the most serious, persistent human rights problems in Chile.'' Freedom of speech and the press are ''severely restricted.'' In Cuba, repression continued, but the Government ''sought to improve its human rights image'' by releasing many long-term political prisoners. Cuba allowed internationally recognized human rights groups to visit and made some improvements in prison conditions, but most of the changes were ''easily reversible, one-time actions,'' it said. Death Squads in Salvador The report contains stronger criticism of El Salvador's human rights record than in the past. It says that ''formal paramilitary death squads ceased to exist after 1983,'' but that members of the Government security forces ''appear to have summarily executed at least 14 individuals'' in the first 10 months of 1988. In Guatemala, the Government was said not to condone human rights violations, but the national police reported an average of 27 kidnappings a month, nearly three times the rate reported in 1986 and 1987. In Nicaragua, the Sandinista authorities suppressed peaceful opposition to their rule, using ''Government-controlled mobs'' to intimidate protesters and discourage demonstrations. In Panama, ''a de facto military dictatorship headed by Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega'' suppressed anti-Government demonstrations with birdshot, rubber truncheons, water cannon and tear gas. Copies of the study, ''Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1988,'' can be obtained from the United States Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402."
