"In the Iranian town of Kerman the other day, two women and two men were buried chest-deep in the earth so that people could bombard them with rocks. They were dead in l5 minutes. The authorities explained that stoning for sex offenses was sanctified by the Koran. Iran's chief executioner, Ayatollah Khalkhali, shrugged his assent: ''We approve of anything the Koran says. What is the difference between killing people with stones and with bullets? But throwing stones certainly teaches people a lesson.'' The story was a one-day wonder, and the world moved on. But it is hard to forget because Iran is only one of many governments that tolerate, even encourage, the brutal termination of ''undesirables.'' And no matter how ghastly the procedure, there is always someone smoothly arguing that official inhumanity must be seen ''in perspective'' and ''understood.'' In the case of Iran, some argue, Americans ought to recall their partnership with the Shah and therefore complicity in the torture carried out by his secret police. It is also said that Americans should ''understand'' Islam and not use their own values to judge other cultures. After all, death by stoning is also a common practice in Saudi Arabia, and is it worth upsetting the Saudis by making a fuss? At least on ''practical'' grounds, Americans are further asked to be understanding of antiterrorist excesses by governments with which the United States collaborates in one degree or another - the Philippines, Argentina, South Korea, Indonesia. Sad to say, this indulgence is now being claimed for Turkey. As a terrorist challenge has mounted, Ankara has relaxed restraints on police torture and, more ominously, by free-wheeling vigilante gangs. Not long ago, a young dissident schoolteacher missing from his village was found with his eyes and tongue gouged out and his head soaked in acid to assure an agonizing death. We decline to ''understand.'' It has taken centuries to distill a code of human rights that transcends differences in creed or ideology and its norms have been defined in United Nations treaties.  These are, admittedly, routinely flouted, but to argue that lack of compliance invalidates the norms is to argue that an unpunished murder invalidates the laws against homicide. This unhappy epoch teaches no more vivid lesson than the danger of excusing the indefensible. To the medieval mind of an Ayatollah Khalkhali, death by stoning is justified because it is mentioned in the Koran. But for centuries, Islam also sanctioned slavery, and it was one of the scandals of imperialism that the slave-trade was abetted or winked at by Europeans. Cultural relativism has its limits, and at some point tolerance becomes complicity. The stoning at Kerman, like any act of official sadism, can properly be understood only in this sense - as an obscenity that coarsens the common name of humanity."
