"Six years ago, Soviet armed forces invaded Afghanistan, killed the president and installed a puppet regime. Since then, the occupation has grown in size and brutality. Supported by tanks, artillery and air power, Soviet troops have increased to about 120,000; Soviet losses already exceed 30,000. Yet the conflict shows no sign of abating. Indeed, recent reports indicate that Moscow is preparing for a protracted war of attrition. Despite overwhelming odds, the Afghan resistance has continued its extraordinary war of liberation. The resistance is better armed, better trained and more effective than ever before. As a result, neither side has been able to defeat the other. Today, Bill Bradley, Democrat of New Jersey, is a member of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. an increasingly violent stalemate exists. The war has inflicted great hardship on the Afghan people. Indiscriminate carpet bombing has leveled entire villages; whole populations have been massacred. Faced with the prospect of mass starvation, millions of Afghans have fled to neighboring Pakistan. Some four million people - a third of the population - are in exile. This is not the first time that the Soviet Union has resorted to genocide to secure its political ends. In 1932, Stalin manufactured a famine in the Ukraine to crush peasant opposition to collectivization. More than five million people starved to death, though to this very day the Soviet Government denies that this tragedy ever took place. And at the end of World War II, Moscow suppressed Baltic freedom-fighters by destroying their economic base and deporting half a million people to Siberia. The genocide in Afghanistan is one more appalling episode in a historical pattern of Soviet terror, and the world must now forcefully oppose it. So far, the United States has paid lip service to the resistance's goal of national liberation and self-determination, but our country's actions are based on the worst-case presumption that the Soviet Union will ultimately prevail. This misplaced pessimism ill serves the Afghan cause at a time when the resistance is not only continuing to fight but improving its military capabilities and achieving greater political cohesion. The resistance has begun to demonstrate a capacity not only for protracted guerrilla warfare but also for using modern methods of communication to coordinate large-scale counterattacks. Meanwhile, disparate tribal and religious groups have merged into an alliance of seven major parties. The members of this alliance are rapidly developing a modern concept of an independent, neutral Islamic state as the unifying principle for their struggle. They are beginning to supplement their increasingly effective military logistics and support operations with new civil service and administrative functions, especially health care and education, that could form the basis for a full-fledged government. To sustain these domestic gains and rally international support for its struggle, the alliance is taking concrete steps to establish itself as the legitimate unified representative of the Afghan people in bodies like the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the United Nations. Last fall, during a visit to America, alliance spokesmen announced plans to open offices in New York and other major cities around the world. These are important developments that all nations must support. On a practical level, supporting the alliance means recognizing it as the sole legitimate representative of the Afghan people. It means backing its claim to Afghanistan's seat in the Islamic Conference, which suspended Afghanistan's membership immediately after the invasion, and helping it pave the way for United Nations membership. Most important, America must refuse to guarantee any negotiated settlement to which the legitimate representatives of the Afghan people are not party, or which calls for American nonintervention as a prerequisite for Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan. Finally, we must make greater efforts to focus world attention on the Afghan genocide and the resistance's heroic refusal to give in. Voting to condemn the Soviet Union once a year at the United Nations is not enough. It is time for a concerted undertaking to confer international legitimacy on the resistance and to raise the political costs to the Soviet Union of continuing this pitiless, relentless war."
