"Mr. Justice Brandeis, in a memorable opinion on freedom of speech, said Government should not be able to forbid the expression of political ideas even when a majority considered them ''fraught with evil consequence.'' He warned ''that it is hazardous to discourage thought, hope and imagination; that fear breeds repression; that repression breeds hate ...'' Brandeis was the great American Zionist of his day. It is not hard to imagine how he would feel now about the practice of political censorship by the state for whose rebirth he so passionately worked.  To ban Palestinian poetry because it contains nationalist images, he would say, or even to ban outright political tracts, is futile -and hazardous to Israel. But censorship of books in the West Bank and Gaza, it is argued, is justified by military necessity. After all, the areas are under military occupation, and no occupation force can be expected to allow the circulation of writings that criticize the occupier and offer a contrary political vision. That argument could be taken seriously if the Government of Israel viewed its hold on the West Bank and Gaza as a temporary necessity.  But it does not. Prime Minister Begin has made it clear that he wants to annex the territories or, at a minimum, keep effective control of them forever. So what is really involved is an attempt to suppress the political feeling of 1.3 million Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza indefinitely. They are to exist, in Brandeis's words, without thought, hope or imagination. Or they may find the repression so painful that they will leave: the outcome openly desired by some Israeli politicians, notably Defense Minister Ariel Sharon. Book censorship is only a small part of the apparatus of repression in the occupied territories. When I first wrote about it, from Israel in March, I mentioned it along with abuses such as the prolonged detention of Palestinians without trial: the detention even of 14-year-old boys. The occupation authorities protested the criticism of censorship, but they made no comment on the other cited examples of repressive methods. And since then the evidence of repression has mounted. Beginning in March, the occupation authorities dismissed the elected Mayors of four West Bank towns. The resulting protest demonstrations were put down by Israeli soldiers and settler vigilantes with tactics that left 15 Arabs, most of them teen-agers, dead; two soldiers were also killed. Six Israeli officers last week de-plored the tactics they had seen used in the occupied territories. They said soldiers without proper training were treating Arabs as objects, not human beings, and inflicting collective punishment without evidence. ''They swooped down on demonstrators like animals tearing at prey,'' Lieut. Rami Avni said. ''This is how we're educating our soldiers? Good God, what will become of us?'' That is not the only example of a heartening phenomenon: Israelis speaking out against excesses in the occupation. An ad hoc committee of professors at the Hebrew University issued a report criticizing the occupation authorities for closing West Bank universities and generally assuming unwarranted powers over them. The attempt to force Israeli identity cards on Druse residents of the Golan Heights after that territory was annexed also drew some criticism in Israel. Haim Cohen, a revered former justice of the Supreme Court, commenting on brutal tactics used in the Golan, said he had to ask himself: ''Is this Israeli law that they are imposing?  It is the law of barbarians.'' But such willingness to see the reality of the occupation is rare.  The man who first criticized the book censorship, Ory Bernstein, an Israeli poet, did so because most Israelis refuse to let themselves see what is being done in their name. ''The complacent majority looks aside,'' he said. My concern was and is the same. The Begin Government, moreover, is doing all it can to conceal the unpleasant facts of what is going on in the territories. It closed the Druse villages of the Golan Heights to all outsiders for nearly six weeks. It has forbidden Israeli broadcasters to interview Palestinians it says are ''radical.'' Officials are trying to squeeze out the reporter who provides the most respected, important coverage of the West Bank, Rafik Halabi of Israeli television. In this country, too, there are those who would silence the truth about the occupation. Things as bad or worse happen in other countries, they say. To criticize any Israeli policy is to weaken that harassed state; people should stop finding fault with Israel. How Louis Brandeis would have scorned such arguments. He did not work for a Jewish state so it could be compared with the tyrannies of the earth; he expected it to be a beacon of freedom. He knew that wise government does not flourish in silence; it needs truth, however painful. And he would see now, in the West Bank and Gaza, proof that repression breeds hate."
