"International A2-9 The Israeli High Court of Justice unanimously validated the deportation of more than 400 Palestinians from the occupied territories to Lebanon. The ruling is likely to put Israel on a collision course with the U.N. Security Council, which has condemned the deportations.  A1 Israel's ruling is a disappointment to the Clinton Administration.  A9 After three weeks of fighting between Government troops and guerrilla forces, Angola is sinking ever closer to disintegration as it confronts the worst crisis of its nearly 30 years of armed conflict, economic hardship and political strife.  A1 Diphtheria is spreading rapidly through Russia, reaching what the World Health Organization calls epidemic proportions. The acutely infectious disease is also rising dangerously in Ukraine, and cases are being reported in other former Soviet republics.  A8 The U.S. and six other major industrial nations have agreed to create a multimillion-dollar fund to improve the safety of nuclear reactors in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.  A2 All across China, people are talking about the chance to buy a ""piece of America,"" or a deed to a square inch of terrain in all 50 states, for prices as high as $1,700 for a novelty gift that sells for $49.95 in the U.S.  A1 U.S., Japanese and German researchers gave the first public demonstration of a telephone system that translates conversations from one language to another.  A1 Serbs and Croats fought a fierce artillery and mortar battle in a struggle in Croatia to control a strategic and heavily mined dam that provides hydroelectric power to much of the Dalmatian coast.  A3 Diplomats said the Yugoslav Army would probably not intervene.  A3 Progress was reported in talks in Geneva.  A3 Prime Minister John Major of Britain announced that he was suing two magazines for libel after they reported a rumor that he had an affair with a caterer.  A5 A Khmer Rouge soldier has confessed that he and a squad of other Khmer Rouge guerrillas killed 15 ethnic Vietnamese civilians in a massacre motivated by ethnic hatred, the U.N. announced.  A7 Plans to deploy U.N. observers in Haiti to monitor human rights violations and discourage political violence have been stalled by objections from Haitian leaders.  A7 Shining Path guerrillas exploded a truck bomb outside I.B.M.'s headquarters in Peru, wounding 15 people and damaging 50 houses in an upper-class suburb. The attack culminated a week of rebel violence intended to disrupt mayoral elections.  A6 Cultural fortunes are changing on the Right Bank in Paris.  A4 National A10-16 The Government reported that the gross domestic product grew at an annual rate of 3.8 percent in the final quarter of 1992, its strongest performance in four years.  A1 News analysis: The battle over homosexuals in the armed services is the latest instance of a pattern in which Washington politicians and commentators conclude that the public does not care about a given issue -- and are then proved profoundly wrong.  A1 Clinton and crucial Senators near a compromise on the issue. A12 A Federal judge gave Clinton a valuable new weapon in the battle.  A13 Once again, talk radio has seized on an issue.  A12 In funeral services at the National Cathedral, Justice Marshall was mourned by most of the nation's leaders, including the President. Chief Justice Rehnquist, often at odds with Justice Marshall on legal issues, spoke of deep admiration for him.  A16 Two months after being accused of sexual misconduct over the course of his political career, Senator Packwood returned home for a tour of Oregon. The experience was not entirely pleasant.  A10 Dr. Burton Lee, who had stayed on at the Clinton White House after serving as President Bush's physician, was let go within hours of expressing reluctance to give Mr. Clinton an allergy shot.  A10 The White House telephone system is plagued by problems.  A10 The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff backed away from even the modest recommendations he had made for reducing duplication in the roles and the missions of the services.  A13 News analysis: Sessions seems to be gaining ground, and losing it.  A13 The G.O.P. met in St. Louis, set for an internal fight.  A16 The Chicago school board ousted the Superintendent.  A10 A former priest was sentenced to six months for sex molestation.  A13 Law Page B7 A woman to head the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund. Two new law journals tackle issues of concern to Asian Americans. Metro Digest B1 To help close a projected $2.1 billion budget gap in the next fiscal year, the Dinkins administration plans to borrow $215 million from Chemical Bank, using as collateral unpaid property tax debts, senior officials said last night.  A1 Neediest Cases B4 Business Digest D1 Weekend C1-27 Tours that make outsiders insiders.  C1 Dietrich's mystique.  C1 For sports bar, Super Bowl is a sacrament.  C1 Sports B8-16 Basketball: Knicks lose to Hawks. B9 Obituaries A17-18 Kay Swift, composer.  A17 Hannah Wilke, sculptor.  A18 Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27 Editorials Ego and error on the gay issue. A way out for Israel. Cops behind desks. Letters A. M. Rosenthal: Dances with wolves. Anthony Lewis: The issue is bigotry. Charles Millard: Stop the porn explosion. Ben Okri: A prayer from the living."
