"A day after the American elections, Iran took a hard line against the United States today by announcing the arrest of an American executive on charges of corruption and ""links with agents serving foreign intelligence services."" Iranian radio said the American, Milton Meier, 58 years old, who ran a well-known travel agency here, had ""confessed to all the mentioned charges,"" including links with the Shah's secret police, Savak, and ""receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars in bribes from foreign companies."" Although the announcement was made today, it was not known how long Mr. Meier had been detained. [State Department officials in Washington said they were informed about a week ago through the Swiss, who represent American interests in Iran.] Warning From Ayatollah The announcement of the arrest was made on the 13th anniversary of the takeover of the American Embassy in Teheran, as thousands of civil servants and families of the Iran-Iraq war dead marched in front of the former embassy chanting, ""Death to America!"" In a speech commemorating the takeover, the supreme religious leader of Iran, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, accused the United States of fabricating charges of human rights violations against Iran. ""But which country is the real violator of human rights?"" Mr. Khamenei asked a group of students. ""Who is still supporting Israel? That is why nations must fight back. The issue of human rights or terrorism is an accusation against us that they use like a tool."" Mr. Khamenei further warned President-elect Bill Clinton against repeating ""the scandalous slogan about violations of human rights"" in other countries, adding, ""Iran is standing united in confrontation with that policy."" Execution of Head of Savak Mr. Meier, who is from Texas and is married to an Iranian, has lived in Iran for 17 years. The state-run news agency said Mr. Meier's wife is the sister of Gen. Nematollah Nassiri, head of the Shah's secret police, who was executed after a trial in February 1979, shortly after the Iranian revolution. Mr. Meier's friends and acquaintances described him as an affable man who did not join the evacuation of Americans in 1979, citing his love of Iran and his wife. He was also characterized as apolitical whenever questioned about the revolution. During the embassy takeover, in which 52 Americans were held for 444 days, Mr. Meier stayed in Iran. The charges against him, the official Iranian news agency said today, include ""illegal establishments of several trade firms, collecting important economic information, identifying leading elements of commercial institutions and receiving hundreds of thousands of dollars in bribes from foreign companies for providing them with information."" 'Pretext' of Iranian Wife A press release from the information ministry added that Mr. Meier was ""accused of having links with agents serving foreign intelligence services."" ""Meier,"" Iranian radio said, ""has confessed to all the mentioned charges. He is brother-in-law of the head of the former regime's secret police. Meier, who enjoyed Nassiri's backing before the revolution, continued to stay in the country after the revolution on the pretext of having an Iranian wife."" Though reports did not indicate when Mr. Meier was arrested or where he was detained, the announcement was made as a new anti-Western mood has raised questions about Iran's future politics. Last week Iran reaffirmed Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's death sentence against Salman Rushdie, the British writer, and raised the reward for his killing to more than $2 million. Politicians say that in the last three months President Hashemi Rafsanjani's authority has been limited to setting economic policy, and Ayatollah Khamenei has become increasingly involved in foreign policy, internal security and cultural affairs. Other Iranian officials have expressed concern over the stress by the incoming Democratic Administration in Washington on the observance of human rights.  U.S. Knew of Case a Week Ago WASHINGTON, Nov. 4 (Special to The New York Times) -- State Department officials said today that they were informed of the arrest about a week ago through the Swiss, who represent American interests in Teheran, and kept the case secret. The officials said they hoped that Mr. Meier could be quietly released through diplomatic channels. Mr. Meier has not been given access to consular officials. Mr. Meier, a Texan who speaks in a marked Southern drawl, was familiar to many foreigners who visited his travel agency, Mandy, named after his daughter. The State Department has tried to play down the political significance of Mr. Meier's arrest. ""We've seen the reports that a U.S. citizen has been arrested in Iran,"" a spokeswoman, Sondra McCarty, said. ""We have asked the Swiss Embassy in Teheran, which handles American interests, to investigate the reports. Without a Privacy Act waiver from the individual reportedly involved, we are unable to release further information."" Another State Department official added: ""At this point it is strictly a consular issue and does not have any political dimension. We don't take it as as a charge that was trumped up to get at the United States."" But the timing of the arrest suggests that it was orchestrated to send signals to the Rafsanjani Government and Mr. Clinton's transition team that they should not expect an improvement in relations with the United States."
