"The Sudan's Islamic Government, censured for its human rights violations and its support for various armed Islamic militant groups, is now helping Muslim fundamentalists in their effort to topple the Algerian Government, according to Western intelligence reports. The Sudan, the reports say, is assisting the Algerian guerrillas by permitting Iran to use the Sudan as a transit point for weapons being smuggled to Algerian guerrillas. The elaborate operation to arm the Algerians apparently involves shipping or flying weapons that originate in Iran to the Sudan and through the remote desert region in northern Chad to Niger or Libya and on to Algeria, intelligence reports say. Clinton Administration officials said the shipments have contained ammunition and small arms. It was unclear, they said, whether Libya has cooperated, but these officials said they were now ""watching the situation closely."" There was no doubt, these officials said, that Algerian insurgents were also receiving specialized training in Lebanon and the Sudan. ""What all this shows is that Iran is prepared to fish in troubled waters where it can,"" a senior Administration official said. ""But the movement is not operating from Teheran. Teheran is putting fuel on the fire."" At a time when an increasing number of militant groups are finding a haven in the Sudan, many see the Khartoum Government's assistance to the Algerian rebels as the most serious challenge to Western security interests in the region since the Islamic regime seized power here in a 1989 coup. ""We are reassessing just how dangerous Sudan is to our security interests,"" one Western diplomat said. ""It is one thing to provide a sanctuary to Islamic militants and allow them to train, and another to become a conduit for arms to the Algerian insurgents. It is one thing to have an Islamic Government here, and quite another to have one in Algeria."" Hassan al-Turabi, the secretary general of the Popular Arab and Islamic Conference, who is widely considered the most powerful figure in the Sudan, said the charges were invented by the United States as ""part of its campaign to destroy the Sudan."" But many diplomats say that as Syria edges closer to a peace agreement with Israel, Khartoum is rapidly replacing Damascus as a center for many Middle Eastern terrorist groups. Syria, Iraq, Libya, Iran and the Sudan are all listed by the State Department as being ""a state sponsor of terrorism,"" and therefore denied United States aid. ""There has been a trend during the past few months of groups shifting their bases from Damascus to Khartoum,"" a senior Western diplomat said. ""Every week the numbers here increase."" Militants trying to topple the Western-supported governments in Egypt, Tunisia, Saudi Arabia and Algeria are all based in the Sudan, and the Government is charged with airlifting weapons to Mohammed Farah Aidid, a Somali clan leader. Hamas, Islamic Holy War and the Party of God, Muslim groups linked to numerous attacks against Israel, as well as international terrorists such as Abu Nidal, have operatives and camps here, Western diplomats said. Ilich Ramirez Sanchez, the Venezuelan-born terrorist known as Carlos, lived in Khartoum for a year. He was turned over to the French Government in August, but only after Paris threatened to mount an international campaign publicizing his presence. Senior Sudanese officials have admitted that they tried in vain to find another country that would accept Mr. Sanchez so he could escape extradition. Osama Bin Laden, a wealthy Saudi financier who bankrolls Islamic militant groups from Algeria to Saudi Arabia, also lives under heavy guard in Khartoum. Western diplomats also note that there have been repeated instances of Sudanese terrorists turning up in international conflicts. During the civil war in Yemen earlier this year the secessionist southern forces, who eventually lost, captured several Sudanese fighting for the north. And eight of those arrested for planning terrorist attacks in New York last year carried Sudanese passports. The Sudan's connections to other wars and guerrilla movements have not diverted attention from its own civil war, which has left one million dead and driven another two million people from their homes, and is costing the Khartoum Government $2 million a day. The war pits the northern-based Islamic Government against Christian and animist rebels in the south. The rebels are fighting for autonomy from Khartoum, which has mounted an intense campaign to convert southerners to Islam, impose Arabic to replace tribal languages and demolish villages and towns suspected of supporting the rebel movements. The decision to increase the Sudan's role in regional conflicts has been accompanied by a new stridency against the West. The state-controlled television spends hours each day broadcasting messages calling for a ""holy war"" against ""infidels,"" playing martial music as armed militias march across the screen and flashing pictures of the latest martyrs. The Popular Defense Force, an Islamic paramilitary organization, requires government workers to spend 45 days in training, during which they are drilled and given lectures on the ideological clash between Islam and the West. ""Turabi and his people see themselves as extremely important,"" a senior Western diplomat said. ""They believe they are in the forefront of an Islamic revolution that is sweeping the Islamic world."" Military cooperation remains close between the Sudan and Iran, Western diplomats said. There are several hundred members of Iran's Revolutionary Guards in the Sudan, assisting Khartoum with its war against southern guerrillas and training militants from other countries in special camps, Western diplomats said. The Iranian Navy uses Port Sudan as one of its resupply ports and the Iranian Air Force has been given special landing rights. It is this military cooperation that has allowed the Iranians to set up Khartoum as a bridge to get weapons and supplies into Algeria, the diplomats said. The fighting in Algeria began in January 1992 when the authorities canceled the second round of a general election that would have given Islamic fundamentalists control of the Government. Clashes take place every day between militant rebel bands and security forces, often in the capital, Algiers. Between 10,000 and 30,000 people, mostly members of the security forces and the armed militant groups, have been killed. The intensity and audacity of the attacks by the militants, which have put the army more and more on the defensive, have increased dramatically in recent weeks. Although the Sudan's military ties are strongest with Iran, its enduring commercial connections are with Iraq. More than half a dozen Sudanese ministers have been in Baghdad this year to sign various agreements; numerous trade agreements have been made with Iran but never implemented. But Sudan's relationships with the two countries are not exclusive. Senior Iraqi, Iranian and Sudanese intelligence officials gathered for a high- level meeting in Khartoum recently, according to Western diplomats. Map of Sudan showing location of Khartoum."
