"To the Editor: I just attended the People's Tribunal, founded by the late Bertrand Russell, which met in Paris to determine whether the Soviets in their occupation of Afghanistan have committed any acts contrary to conventions on human rights in war, especially against the civilian population. After seeing booby-trap mines in the form of plastic toys, pens and pencils and valises; after holding in my hands gas masks removed from dead Soviet soldiers; after seeing photographs of the black, bloated faces of dead Afghan women and children, and after hearing many eyewitnesses of atrocities wrought by the Red Army and its allies, I have no doubt that the Soviets have violated human rights and the rules of war. The policy of genocide against the rural population of Afghanistan by the Soviet forces and their Afghan and other allies is now well documented, for all the world to see and hear. There is ample proof of the murder last Sept. 13 of over one hundred civilians in a village's underground irrigation canal - by chemicals poured into the tunnel and exploded. The use of torture on captured Afghan freedom fighters, as well as on civilians, has many witnesses -among them victims who were released so they would spread the information and thereby terrorize the populace. Women and children are not spared, and especially horrible was the account of a woman who had her infant slowly strangled in front of her in an effort to force her to reveal where she obtained information detrimental to the rulers of Afghanistan. When power-hungry sadists become rulers of any country, the world must take notice and protest their crimes against humanity. The war in Afghanistan is brutalizing the Soviet soldiers, who do not deserve such a fate. Can we hope that, by publicizing atrocities, the voices of humanity -including those in the Soviet Union -may come to be heard and may persuade the former K.G.B. officials now ruling the Soviet Union to cease their savage occupation of Afghanistan, such that the end of the 20th century may also see an end to such horrors as the Holocaust, Cambodia and Afghanistan? RICHARD N. FRYE, Paris, Dec. 19, 1982. The writer is Aga Khan Professor of Iranian at Harvard University."
