"Yasir Arafat as tough-minded political boss cracking down on Palestinian terrorists seems an incongruous image, but that roughly describes the latest step in his shift from Israel's enemy to its partner in peace. The chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization is now embarked on the administration of Gaza and Jericho, and he has made progress in establishing civil authority. Mr. Arafat's techniques leave much to be desired. The hard-fisted repression and the lawless traditions of his guerrilla movement have led to serious human rights abuses. Amnesty International and others have complained about secret detention and trials, abuse of suspects and unfair procedures. Mr. Arafat has certainly lost much of his romantic appeal to disaffected Palestinian youth. Despite the excesses, Gaza Palestinians seem happy with the fruits of his new course. Recent polls show majorities feeling more secure and optimistic about the future and personally supportive of the P.L.O. chairman. Most Palestinians welcome relief from the Israeli occupation and the oppressive puritanism imposed by the fundamentalists who used to rule Gaza's streets. Mr. Arafat has also become a far more credible negotiating partner with Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzhak Rabin. Mr. Arafat's firmer governance is largely responsible for the recent progress toward extending Palestinian rule to major cities of the West Bank. As autonomy is expanded in the next months, the P.L.O.'s credit should further improve. These gains have given Mr. Arafat the political strength to take on Islamic militants of Hamas and other organizations that preach and practice violence. Attacks on Israelis have sharply declined, although spectacular new suicide bombings are always possible. The police forces working for Mr. Arafat's Palestinian Authority have been beefed up to 20,000 and ordered to take control of the streets. Many of today's Palestinian police are former guerrilla fighters. Col. Jabril Rajoub, a Jericho-based police commander, was once among Israel's most wanted terrorists and served 18 years in Israeli prisons. Now he says: ""There is a Palestinian Authority which Hamas must respect. . . . Not all Palestinians are asked to support the peace agreement with Israel. But they can object at the ballot box."" Hamas, acknowledging this success of the crackdown, has begun shifting its efforts into grass-roots organizing in schools, mosques and social service organizations. In the long run, rule of law is the best guarantee of security in the Palestinian areas. Mr. Arafat has not yet established a fully operational administration. He fails to delegate authority, cannot account for development aid and stifles a critical press. But on one of the most important prerequisites to the future of Palestinian autonomy, security, Yasir Arafat has done more than many predicted. For that he deserves credit."
