"To the Editor: Hold on to your hats. The grand campaign to rewrite the history of the Persian Gulf war is on. And the campaign of revisionist history begins with rewriting the causes of that war. If you thought that the cause of the war was the brutal invasion of Kuwait by President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, you are wrong. If you thought that the cause was Saddam Hussein's reckless and premeditated aggression that gave him control of Kuwait's vast oil resources and imminent domination of the giant Saudi oil fields -- giving him mastery of the energy jugular of the world -- you are wrong. If you thought the cause of the war was his horrendous human rights violations -- the verified poison-gassing of his own citizens, and verified torture and murder -- you are wrong. If you thought the cause of the war was Saddam Hussein's growing nuclear capability, his huge stock of biological and chemical weapons and missile capabilities -- you are wrong. The real cause of the war, according to John R. MacArthur (Op-Ed, Jan. 6), was a concocted story by the 15-year-old daughter of the Kuwaiti ambassador to Washington! She allegedly fabricated a story about premature infants' being taken from their incubators by the invading Iraqi military and left to die. The article's sinister innuendo suggests that the girl was not even in Kuwait at the time of the Iraqi invasion, and that the whole gruesome incident was a diabolical plot by an American public relations firm. So much for revisionist history; now for the facts. The Congressional Human Rights Caucus decided to hold a hearing on Iraqi human rights abuses in Kuwait, and it sought individuals who could give eyewitness accounts of what was happening there. Among several individuals brought to its attention was a 15-year-old Kuwaiti girl, Nayirah. At the time of the hearing, it was requested that her identity -- and the identity of another witness -- not be made public to protect friends and associates in Kuwait from Iraqi retaliation, including torture and murder. I felt then, and I feel now, that this was a legitimate request given Iraqi atrocities in Kuwait. It would be hard to think of a more appropriate use of witness protection -- an honored and universally accepted American practice under infinitely less dangerous circumstances. The Congressional Human Rights Caucus has a Democratic and a Republican co-chairman, and each of us has one staff person. The staff work together in preparing caucus hearings, and each co-chairman is briefed by his staff person. The co-chairmen do not brief each other. We alternate presiding over caucus events. The fact that Nayirah was the daughter of the Ambassador of Kuwait made her a more credible witness. The Kuwaiti Government would have considerably more to lose if the daughter of its Ambassador were not telling the truth than if some man-in-the-street lied. If anything, her relationship to the Ambassador and Government enhanced her credibility. Nayirah's account took a few minutes during a hearing that lasted several hours. Other eyewitnesses gave much longer and more extensive accounts of atrocities by Iraqi troops in occupied Kuwait. Her account was consistent with the information we received from other witnesses, with hundreds of other atrocity stories from Kuwait carried by media around the globe, and consistent with reports by independent human rights organizations, such as Amnesty International, who also testified at our hearing and subsequently published accounts similar to Nayirah's. Was Nayirah telling the truth? Mr. MacArthur's unsubstantiated innuendo that Nayirah was not even in Kuwait when the atrocities occurred was never checked. The State Department confirms that she was in Kuwait at the time of the Iraqi invasion and remained there for several weeks until she could escape. Given the countless cases of verified Iraqi human rights violations, including torture and murder, before, during and since the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, it was hardly necessary for any government or any public relations firm to manufacture false stories. There were so many appalling accounts, all sickeningly true, that it would have been totally unnecessary and counterproductive to invent atrocities. The suggestion of some special relationship with the public relations firm Hill and Knowlton is absurd. The caucus has held hearings on human rights abuses on countries around the globe -- from the Soviet Union to South Africa, from Indonesia to Central America. We have exposed violations by our closest and most democratic allies, including Great Britain, when we held hearings on human rights abuses involving the Birmingham Six and others in Northern Ireland. These caucus activities are held without regard to whether these countries are represented by any law firm or public relations firm. Mr. MacArthur's deceptive article serves only the cynics who seek to rewrite the history of the Persian Gulf war. (Rep.) TOM LANTOS Co-chairman, Congressional Human Rights Caucus Washington, Jan. 23, 1992"
