"The author of a human rights report on Afghanistan complained today that the United Nations had eliminated his charges of Soviet and Afghan Government atrocities before circulating the report as an official document. The excluded annex is to be circulated among delegates in English only, without translation into the other official United Nations languages -French, Spanish, Russian, Chinese -and with no official status. The author of the report, Felix Ermacora, an Austrian lawyer, told a General Assembly committee it was ''highly irregular'' that 13 pages edited out of the final document included a description of nearly all atrocities purportedly committed by Soviet and Afghan Government forces, including the torture of woman and children. He called the abridgment ''arbitrary'' and noted that a 125-page report last week on Israeli human rights practices in occupied Arab territories had been circulated in its entirety. The decision to edit the report was made by William Buffum, the Under Secretary General in charge of the General Assembly and a former State Department official. Mr. Buffum told reporters Monday that the decision ''had no political connotations'' and was taken for financial reasons. The entire report, including the annex, ''will be on delegates' tables when it is discussed,'' he said. The spokesman for the United States Mission, Richard C. Hottelet, said he thought there was no political motive for the abridgment, but he called it a ''bureaucratic mistake.'' LONDON, Wednesday, Nov. 19 (AP) - Amnesty International, the rights group, said in a report issued today that Afghan Government security forces frequently tortured political prisoners and that Soviet personnel often watched. The report quoted men and women identified as victims. The 51-page report, covering the period since the Soviet military intervention in December 1979, quoted former prisoners as having said that they were beaten, subjected to electric shocks, burned with cigarettes and some of their hair was torn out."
