"To the Editor: A human rights tragedy of enormous proportions has been unfolding in the last weeks, marked by murder, beatings, shootings and deportations. And it is happening in the heart of Europe. The drive by the Bulgarian Government to crush its 1.5-million ethnic Turkish minority has reached alarming proportions, with the Bulgarian leadership using the full force of the state to crush or expel citizens of Turkish descent. The grave developments in Bulgaria are a source of deep concern to my country. The community of nations must do more than react to this situation with indifference, passing interest or silence. A population has been systematically reduced over the last five years in Bulgaria, as noted in Amnesty International's February 1989 report, ''Imprisonment of Ethnic Turks and Human Rights Activists.'' Ethnic Turks have been victims of Bulgaria's attempt to annihilate their identity, forcing them to abandon their given names, to stop writing and even speaking their language, and suppressing their religious practices, dress and customs. Thousands of ethnic Turkish Bulgarian citizens have been murdered and jailed, and others stripped of their citizenship. Beatings have been the familiar answer to cries for freedom of religion, speech and assembly. Now thousands are leaving the country, some at gunpoint fleeing for their lives, others without more than the clothes on their backs and meager amounts of money. Families have been separated, and homes left behind are being acquired by the Bulgarian Government. Bulgaria has violated the Helsinki accords of 1975 and has in essence challenged all member states to ignore Bulgaria's actions, enabling it to do as it pleases, without outside questioning or opprobrium. We implore a reversal of this hands-off policy. The Government of Turkey has thrown open its Bulgarian border, welcoming these refugees from oppression. The number of refugees arriving in Turkey has reached 85,000 within a few weeks, with 3,000 refugees a day leaving Bulgaria for Turkey. And it shows no sign of stopping. The world is confronted by the largest human uprooting in Europe since World War II. We would like the international community to join in a common pledge that Bulgaria must not be permitted to behave as a pariah state without being treated as one. Turkey has repeatedly called upon Bulgaria for bilateral negotiations to resolve the minority Turkish situation amicably. Our country has time and again requested restoration of the rights and status of this oppressed minority, and the recognition of its rights to a choice in emigration. These calls have been disregarded by the Bulgarian Government. The issue has been brought, for example, to the Council of Europe, the United Nations, the conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and the North Atlantic Assembly. The Bulgarian policy of repression, however, continues unabated. DARYAL BATIBAY Charge d'Affaires, Turkish Embassy   Washington, July 1, 1989"
