"Citing bullet wounds in exhumed bodies, accounts by Kurdish villagers and death lists found in Iraqi secret police records, two human rights groups conclude in a new report that there is strong evidence that President Saddam Hussein's Government engaged in crimes against humanity in killing large numbers of its Kurdish minority. The report, prepared by Middle East Watch and Physicians for Human Rights and issued Saturday, also raises the question whether these acts constituted genocide. Middle East Watch called for a further investigation to make that determination. The issuance of the report follows a seven-day visit in December to the Kurdish region of northern Iraq by a team that included forensic experts and archeologists. It lends support to previous accounts that thousands of Kurds were gassed, shot to death or relocated against their will, and 4,000 of their villages destroyed, during a campaign of terror in 1987 and 1988. In recent months, the Kurds have been left relatively free to run their affairs after returning to their villages under the protection of the American-led forces that defeated President Hussein's armies in the Persian Gulf war early last year. Soon after the war's end, the Kurds rebelled against the central Government in Baghdad, with the urging of the United States. Mr. Hussein's remaining forces crushed the rebellion, prompting the Kurds to flee to Turkey and Iran. Western nations created protected areas for the Kurds to induce them to return to northern Iraq. Further Evidence May Exist The two rights groups, in their report, called on the United Nations ""to help the Kurds conduct a thorough and impartial investigation of the gross violations of human rights described."" ""If our findings in only one small area of the region hold true for other areas,"" they concluded, ""then substantial evidence exists to support the proposition that Iraq has committed crimes against humanity in Kurdistan."" Diplomats at Iraq's mission to the United Nations could not be reached for comment. A man who answered the phone at the mission said no one was available to respond over the weekend. When confronted in the past with charges of abuses against Kurds, Iraqi officials have denied wrongdoing, saying any actions in the region were carried out against inflitrators from Iran or traitors. On Tuesday, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva is expected to adopt a resolution criticizing Iraq's rights record and asking the General Assembly to consider establishing a permanent monitoring system in the country. This follows a report by a former Dutch Foreign Minister, Max van der Stoel, which calls the Iraqi human rights situation the worstsince World War II. The author of the new report, Eric Stover, said Saturday that his team had inspected mass graves in two cities, Sulaimaniya and Erbil. A gravedigger at Saywan Cemetery in Sulaimaniya, Mr. Stover said, told team members that he had ""buried hundreds of people on a hillside there, many of whom had been held in the local prison"" of the Iraqi secret police. Open Pits, Burial Mounds In Erbil, he said, ""a gravedigger took us through Black Hill Cemetery, which was pockmarked with open pits and mounds of tattered clothing."" ""He stopped at a mound about 40 yards long and said he had buried 19 young men there in 1986. They had been selected randomly and executed in retribution for an attempted assassination of the Governor of Erbil."" A body removed from the mound, he said, ""was that of a young male, 16 or 17, with a thick red blindfold around the skull and two bullet wounds."" Mr. Stover said Kurdish leaders have recovered a ""mass of documetary evidence, the secret police records, some of which includes lists of prisoners who have been executed -- their names, their crimes, when they were arrested and when they were killed."" He said there were ""roomfuls of these documents."" One of the experts in the group was Clyde C. Snow, a forensic anthropologist. Last week, Dr. Snow made a separate visit to a Kurdish village, which he identified as Khorme. ""You might describe it as an ex-village,"" he said, charging that on the morning of Aug. 28, 1988, ""an Iraqi military detachment arrived and rounded up the people."" ""They took the women, the children and the older men and kept them in one area. Then they marched the younger men outside the village, just a few hundred yards. There were 34 males. A couple of them were 13-year-olds. They made them kneel down and had a squad of 18 men march in front of them and begin firing."" Copies of the report can be obtained for $5 from the publications department of Human Rights Watch, 485 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017 or from Physicians for Human Rights, 100 Boylston Street, Suite 620, Boston, Mass. 02116."
