"Turkey took on the unaccustomed role of championing human rights when it opened its borders to 60,000 desperate Kurds fleeing Iraq's army and poison gas. This courageous action by Prime Minister Turgut Ozal is sure to damage relations with Baghdad and spotlight Ankara's repression of Turkey's own large Kurdish minority. But the rest of the means to be more attentive to other human rights issues, its chances for admission into the European Community will surely be improved. To be sure, Turkey has come a long way from its late 1970's lawlessness, its early 1980's military regime and repression that until only recently kept Plato's ''Republic'' out of university classrooms. Fragile democracy is growing steadier. Yet charges of brutality by police and torture in the prisons still dog Turkish authorities. And Turkish Kurds are, as ever, denied the most fundamental forms of self-expression, their language and culture outlawed. This last fact makes all the more notable the Turks' granting of safe haven to the Iraqi Kurds (after some initial reports that Turkey had forcibly transferred some refugees to Iran). Turkey may have had little choice, confronted with desperate people arriving by the tens of thousands. Still, the response went beyond bare necessity, perhaps reflecting sensitivity to Western human rights concerns. Western countries have taken notice. The Turks have been commended in the U.S. Senate and praised by the Western diplomatic community in Ankara. Turkey, finding it likes the approval, could stimulate more. Eagerness to get into the Community is already credited with spurring Turkish moves toward peace with Greece. Two other steps could also help. First, and most obviously, Turkey could look toward lifting its repressive hold on its own Kurds. Second, it might at last acknowledge the massacre 70 years ago of Armenians in Turkey, opening the way for an honest examination of Turkey's relations with its minorities. A Turkey that can behave well toward Iraqi Kurds - and enjoy consequent international acclaim - might find that easier than it sounds."
