"Noting that Iraq has still not fulfilled many of the conditions in the cease-fire agreement that ended the Persian Gulf war, the Security Council said today that it would neither lift nor ease the sanctions imposed on Iraq for invading Kuwait in 1990. The Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, told the Council that Iraq had met the main conditions in the agreement and said continuing the sanctions amounted to ""genocide"" against the Iraqi people. No resolution is expected from the two-day session, which Iraq had requested in an effort to get the sanctions lifted, but diplomats said the Council would almost certainly extend the sanctions on Tuesday. The Council President, Andre Erdos of Hungary, opened today's meeting by reading many examples of Iraq's noncompliance. They included Baghdad's refusal to identify its suppliers of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons materials or the full extent of its weapons programs, and to renounce its territorial claims to Kuwait. Rights Abuses Are Cited Cited, too, were Iraq's refusal to sell any of its oil to pay for reparations, its continued human rights abuses against Kurds in northern Iraq and Shiite Muslims in the south, and its harassment of United Nations weapons inspection teams in the country. Before the meeting began today, Mr. Erdos said there had been no movement by Iraq that ""would give the Council any inclination to consider lifting or modifying the sanctions at any time in the near future."" The United States delegate, Edward J. Perkins, called Iraq's record of compliance as ""shameful"" and said its declarations ""are clearly meant to misinform, misdirect, and conceal."" Mr. Perkins also dismissed Iraqi arguments that the sanctions were imposing severe hardships on the Iraqi people. The Council, he said, had provided seed and tractors. ""If food is not reaching the Iraqi people, it is because the Iraqi regime has diverted food imports to the military and security forces, which allow Saddam to maintain his brutal dictatorship,"" he said.  London Assailed on Sales LONDON, Nov. 23 (Special to The New York Times) -- The British Government tonight faced the most blistering attack yet from the political opposition over British sales of military technology to Iraq in the 1980's. The Labor Party called on Parliament to condemn what it suggested was a betrayal of British soldiers in the Persian Gulf war and a deception of the public at home. Brushing aside the Government's denials that it had knowingly helped arm Baghdad in violation of a 1985 policy barring military exports to Iraq, Labor Party members criticized the Conservative Party of Prime Minister John Major for approving the sale of machinery that despite having commercial applications could also be used for making shells and missiles. ""The first charge against this Government is that in the two years before the gulf war, they had helped to equip that war machine and in two years provided hundreds of millions of pounds of machine tools, straight to the factories that made the weapons,"" said Robin Cook, who led the Labor Party's arguments in the debate in Parliament."
