"One of the warmest memories of Thierry Desmarest, chairman of the French oil company Total S.A., came when, fresh out of France's finest schools, he was on his own managing a mine in New Caledonia. ""I was 18,000 kilometers away from my immediate superior with no faxes and telephone connections -- it was fantastic!"" he said. Last Sunday he realized how far he had come when he went to Teheran and signed a $2 billion agreement to develop one of Iran's largest natural gas fields. The deal brought a firestorm of criticism from the United States, which says Iran supports terrorism, but drew praise from the French Government. Since then the faxes, phones and telegrams have poured in, many of them, the company says, with support from around the world, including some from American oil executives. Few adopted the official United States view that the deal violates an American anti-terrorism law and could subject Total to economic sanctions. ""To say the incremental share of our project in a country already producing 3.6 million barrels of oil a day will help finance terrorism while the country already possesses huge revenues from its hydrocarbon exports is absurd,"" Mr. Desmarest said this afternoon in his offices atop a 30-story tower on the outskirts of Paris. ""I never practicsed politics, but it seems to me the concept of extraterritoriality is not compatible with our day and age,"" he added. A courteous 51-year-old whose main strength is never to show emotion, Mr. Desmarest seemed unable to suppress a smile as he said, ""It was, I believe, Ms. Albright who said politics, after all, is part principles and part pragmatism.""' This was a sarcastic reference to an earlier statement by Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright explaining why Washington does not place sanctions on China but has no qualms advocating them for Myanmar, when both countries are accused of violating human rights. Ever since the agreement was signed to develop the South Pars natural gas field with Gazprom of Russia and Petronas of Malaysia, Mr. Desmarest has been caught in a fight between two traditional allies. For its part, the European Union has threatened a trade war if the United States acts on what much of the world regards as imposing American law on sovereign nations. ""We will respect all legislation applied by the United Nations, France or international law,"" he said. ""But we are under no obligation to apply an American law produced by a domestic lobby for narrow interests."" His remarks reflect a common view among international oil executives. Faced with a looming shortage of oil, major producers are scouring the globe for production possibilities and chafe at restrictions imposed by the United States. Executives from major American oil companies argue that sanctions rarely force governments to change their policies, and that Americans are shut out of projects in some of the most promising areas as rivals like Total sew up lucrative deals. ""We cannot isolate ourselves from half of the world's oil and gas reserves and believe that it does not have a negative impact on the United States,"" said Archie W. Dunham, president and chief executive of Conoco. At Total, Mr. Desmarest's shy manner, his gray suits and his aristocratic air, the hallmark of graduates of the ""grandes ecoles,"" have earned him the nickname Little Prince. But Mr. Desmarest, a mining engineer who became chairman and chief executive in 1995, is also known as the ""central computer,"" a manager with a finely honed mind who forgets nothing, analyzes everything and moves audaciously. He confesses that he was taken aback by the American reaction. ""I was surprised by the magnitude of the coverage,"" he said. The confrontation was long in coming. European Union members who do a lot of business with Iran and Libya have long opposed American laws with extraterritorial dimensions: written in the United States but meant to affect trade beyond American borders. There is little question that France, Russia and the European Union knew, as one senior French foreign affairs official put it today, ""they were opening the abscess"" with the Iranian move. Mr. Desmarest does not say quite that, but his feelings about the law are barely disguised. ""We operate in 100 countries,"" he said. ""In all these countries we make sure our operations are clean. We pay proper wages and treat people decently. But it is not our job to change the governments or impose policy."""
