"The United States has expressed concern to Israel about human rights abuses in the occupied territories and has established new procedures to consult regularly with Israeli officials on specific problems. Richard Schifter, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, said recently that Israel and the United States had agreed on ''a joint effort to monitor'' conditions in the territories. The interview was conducted after Mr. Schifter returned from a visit this month to the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Israel designated Shmuel Goren, the chief administrator of the occupied territories, as the person to whom the United States Ambassador, Thomas R. Pickering, should address questions. They have met several times since Mr. Schifter's visit, Israeli officials said. Richard W. Murphy, the Assistant Secertary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, told Congress recently that Israel's treatment of Palestinians was too harsh. ''It doesn't solve the problem,'' he said. ''It just deepens it.'' 'Clear Human Rights Violations' Mr. Schifter said there had been ''clear human rights violations'' resulting from the excessive use of force, and he said Israel should create a special court of appeals for the territories because there were ''very limited opportunities'' for Palestinians to appeal through the existing military court systems there. The Israeli Defense Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, who is responsible for administering the territories, will discuss these issues with Reagan Administration officials and members of Congress when he visits Washington next week. Israeli officials said Mr. Rabin would acknowledge that there had been some aberrations in the conduct of Israeli soldiers in the territories. But, they said, he will also tell American officials that the soldiers now receive stricter, more detailed instructions on the use of weapons and tear gas. They said Mr. Rabin assured Mr. Schifter that Israeli authorities would investigate each complaint and would punish soldiers who have disobeyed orders, and that he intends to repeat that message on his visit here. Tear Gas Sales Halted An American company, Transtechnology Corporation of Sherman Oaks, Calif., recently announced that it would halt its private sales of tear gas to Israel, which are licensed by the United States Government. The company was responding to charges by Arab-American groups and human rights organizations, including Amnesty International, who said Israeli soldiers have fired tear gas into homes, health clinics and other enclosed areas. Israeli officials offered to look into the charges and said tear gas was supposed to be used only to break up protests. Israeli officials are already bracing for criticism early next year when the State Department issues its annual report on human rights practices in countries that receive foreign aid from the United States. In general, under Federal law, the United States is not supposed to provide assistance to any country that ''engages in a consistent pattern of gross violations of internationally recognized human rights.'' State Department officials say that provision is rarely invoked. In any event, they say, Israel's abuses do not constitute such a pattern, so Israel would not lose any of its aid. Israel is getting $1.8 billion in military assistance and $1.2 billion in economic aid from the United States this year. Mr. Schifter told Congress that Israeli soldiers should have ''better riot gear'' and receive more training in the control of riots. In particular, he said, Israel should ''avoid sending out small patrols which can easily be surrounded by large groups of civilians and then have to shoot their way out.'' The State Department contends that some Israeli practices in the West Bank, including the deportation of Palestinians, violate a 1949 Geneva Convention protecting civilians under occupation. Israel denies that the convention applies to the territories, but says it observes many provisions of the treaty in those areas."
