"Last summer, a political science professor in Ankara published a survey based on interviews with 1,200 Kurds whose lives had been swept up in the war that for 11 years has raged between Government forces and Kurdish rebels in southeastern Turkey. The report's findings were neither startling nor particularly threatening. Only a small minority endorsed the idea of an independent Kurdish state, and those who favored a federation were befuddled as to what that meant: some thought federation meant ""peace and bread."" But what the Kurds did say clearly in the personal interviews conducted by the professor, Dogu Ergil, was that now more than ever they consider themselves to be Kurds, a distinct ethnic group that has yet to be recognized by the Turkish state. ""It was the first time the Kurds of Turkey were asked, 'who are you and what do you want,' "" said Dr. Ergil, who heads the political behavior department at Ankara University. ""The overwhelming majority said they want to stay in Turkey, but as Kurds."" In many countries where the population is ethnically divided, such a conclusion would be self-evident. But in Turkey, where for 72 years the Government has struggled to forge a single nation, Dr. Ergil's report was promptly referred to a State Security Court where it is being examined to see if it fits the definition of ""separatist propaganda"" under Article 8 of a 1991 anti-terrorism law. But Dr. Ergil, unlike many others who have dared write or talk about the Kurdish question in Turkey, has not yet been put on trial or in jail. Nor have the sponsors of his report, an association that represents 700,000 small-business executives, disclaimed the author or his findings, despite denunciations in the mainstream press. At a time when Turkey's human rights record is being closely watched, particularly in Europe, the reaction to Dr. Ergil's report reflects Turkey's continuing difficulty in confronting the war in the southeast that since 1984 has claimed 18,000 lives, displaced hundreds of thousands of people and is costing the state an estimated $7 billion a year. Kurds in Turkey, who number about 12 million out of a total population of 65 million, can now openly speak and write in their own language and listen to their own music, rights that were granted them in the 1980's. But they cannot form ethnic associations or use their language in schools, on radio or on television -- something that is classified as ""separatist propaganda."" Dealing with the Kurdish question has always been a challenge for Turkey, founded in 1923 on the ruins of the Ottoman Empire by Mustafa Kemal, known as Ataturk. His vision was of a modern, secular, indivisible Turkish state; for this, it was necessary to create a Turkish national consciousness that allowed no room for a separate Kurdish identity. A Kurdish rebellion in 1925 was summarily suppressed. Turkey's poor human rights record pre-dates the war in the southeast, but the unrelenting campaign of terrorism begun by the Kurdish Workers' Party in 1984 has produced a harsh Government response that many Turks consider essential for peace. The southeast has been placed under a state of emergency; hundreds of Kurdish villages have been forcibly evacuated, sometimes burned; pro-Kurdish political parties have been silenced; prisoners are tortured, and human rights campaigners are jailed. In Istanbul and Ankara, Kurdish newspapers are regularly censored and periodically closed; writers, journalists and intellectuals who have defended broader rights for the Kurdish minority have been tried in court, sometimes jailed. Critics, like Dr. Ergil, have long argued that by suppressing debate on the Kurdish question, Turkey has driven many Kurds into the arms of the Kurdish Workers' Party. ""We found considerable support for the terrorist organization not because these people condone the violence, or think of it as their savior, but because they see it as an organ to air their dissatisfaction,"" he said. Another Turkish journalist was convicted this month for writing a satirical article on the Kurdish question. And on Oct. 12, a State Security Court in Istanbul decided to prosecute an American correspondent for the Reuters news agency on charges that she provoked ""racial hatreds"" by writing an article on the forced evacuation of Kurdish villages that appeared in a Kurdish newspaper in Istanbul. Walter Cronkite, chairman of the Committee to Protect Journalists, met recently with Prime Minister Tansu Ciller to protest the charges against the correspondent, Aliza Marcus. These cases have again put the spotlight on Turkey at a time when the European Parliament is nearing a vote on Turkey's longstanding quest to join the European customs union. The Europeans have insisted that Turkey broaden political rights and ease restrictions on free speech. With the passage last July of constitutional amendments that lifted restrictions on political activity by a number of social groups, attention is now focused on Article 8, a law that regards as a crime any act that ""threatens the indivisible unity of the Turkish state."" According to human rights observers, there are 174 people now in Turkish prisons convicted under Article 8, compared with 120 last year. Mrs. Ciller's coalition Government has promised to push for changes to Article 8, but it is still not clear what amendments she will be able to get through the Parliament. Many politicians resent the pressure from outside the country to change a law that they regard as a cornerstone in the fight against terrorism. Opposition to any softening in the war against the Kurdish Workers' Party has made repeal of Article 8 unlikely, politicians say. ""I want to see Article 8 abolished, but we do not have the majority"" said Hitmet Cetin, who was Deputy Prime Minister in Mrs. Ciller's first coalition Government. ""I want an ideal solution, but we have to be realistic. It was the same thing with the constitutional amendments: We have to start somewhere."" Human rights observers here are skeptical that a change in the law will do much to change Turkey's repressive tactics. They note that several recent cases, including the one brought against Ms. Marcus, have been brought under other articles in the penal code. But Dr. Ergil is hoping for an open debate that looks at the Kurdish question in a broader, more political context. ""We are no longer dealing with single acts of terrorism,"" he said. ""It has risen to the level of a social conflict, and it is a conflict we have to understand, contain and if not eliminate then at least dry out."" Map of Turkey showing location of Kurdish region."
