"Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany paid tribute last night to Simon Wiesenthal, the Nazi-hunter, for helping guide a new generation of Germans back into the ''large family of free nations.'' In the keynote speech at the eastern regional dinner of the Simon Wiesenthal Center at the Marriott Marquis Hotel in Manhattan, Mr. Kohl discussed in unsparing language the horrors of Germany's Nazi past and the special responsibilities borne by the Germans of today, in particular toward Jews and Israel. He opened with a brief defense of Philipp Jenninger, who resigned last week as president of the West German Parliament in a controversy over a speech he gave on the 50th anniversary of Kristallnacht, the Nazi pogrom widely regarded as heralding the Nazi extermination of European Jews. Mr. Kohl cited Mr. Jenninger's record in search of reconciliation and ''helping to safeguard the vital interests of the state of Israel.'' Mr. Wiesenthal, visiting Birmingham, Ala., over the weekend, also defended Mr. Jenninger, a senior member of Mr. Kohl's Christian Democratic Party, and agreed that he had been misunderstood. ''I know the man,'' news reports quoted Mr. Wiesenthal as saying. ''It's a big tragedy.'' Last night, marking Mr. Wiesenthal's 80th birthday on Dec. 31, the Chancellor spoke of the Nazi hunter's personal ordeal and loss of family in the wartime genocide and described him as the personification of ''a humanity that has gone through the fire of the most terrible inhumanity.'' ''In you, dear Simon Wiesenthal,'' he remarked, ''there lives the memory of countless people whom we must not and will not forget.'' 'The Individual Victim' ''You, dear Simon Wiesenthal,'' he added, ''have reminded us time and again that the statistics of millionfold death must not make us blind to the individual victim, to the face of the child, woman or man who were tortured, humilitated and driven to their deaths.'' His voice breaking at times, Mr. Kohl delivered his speech in German and the audience listened to him through simultaneous interpretation. The only real applause came at the end of his half-hour address, with most in the room standing. He noted the temptation of closing one's eyes to terrible truths. After 1945, he asserted, Germans realized that only by ''looking the whole truth in the face'' could they reach ''genuine understanding of the value and worth of responsibly exercised freedom.'' He mentioned the meetings the first West German Chancellor, Konrad Adenauer, had with Nahum Goldmann, one of the founders of 20th century Zionism, and David Ben-Gurion and rejected all efforts to measure the Nazi genocide against instances of persecutions elsewhere and at other times. ''We Germans,'' he declared, ''have to live with the terrible fact that under the National Socialist tyranny, untold suffering was inflicted on the Jews in particular, and that this crime of genocide is without parallel in its cold-blooded, inhuman planning and its deadly efficiency.'' Citing Mr. Wiesenthal's own view, the Chancellor rejected the concept of collective guilt. ''Germans became criminals as individuals,'' he declared, ''but the injustice perpetrated under National Socialist tyranny is part of our common history.'' Mr. Kohl is scheduled to travel to Washington today for talks with President Reagan and, separately, President-elect Bush."
