"Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir today denied Lebanese assertions that Israel was hampering access to southern Lebanon, which it controls, and that it was diverting water from the area. A recent decision to ban the crossing of private automobiles into the south, he said, was intended to thwart attacks on Israeli forces. The charge of stealing water, he said, is ''absolutely ridiculous.'' Speaking to the International Congress of Jewish Lawyers and Jurists, Mr. Shamir alluded to a meeting on Wednesday of the United Nations Security Council to hear complaints from Lebanon about Israeli activities in south Lebanon. ''Recently,'' Mr. Shamir said, ''we have been witnessing an unbridled campaign of slander against Israel.'' The campaign, he asserted, was mounted by the Lebanese Prime Minister, Rashid Karami, who has accused Israel of ''inhuman repression'' in the south and has asked the United Nations to intervene. 1983 Agreement Recalled  Mr. Shamir recalled the 1983 agreement between Israel and Lebanon, which he said established security arrangements and anticipated normalization of relations. It was nullified under Syrian pressure, he declared. Since then, Israel has been tightening its control over the south. Last week it closed the only crossing point between north and south, at Bater, 25 miles south of Beirut, and then reopened it after three days with new restrictions. The new rules, similar to the Israeli procedures at the Allenby Bridge inspection station on the Jordan River, bar cars from crossing at Bater. This is a precaution, the Israelis say, against the carrying of detonators, explosives and similar material. Personal belongings are also carefully scrutinized. Only some commercial vehicles are permitted to cross. Passengers arriving in private vehicles must continue their journey in taxis or buses after waiting about five hours to cross. 'We Will Not Sit By'  Mr. Shamir said that ''Israel has every intention of withdrawing its forces from Lebanon,'' as is not the case with Syria, he asserted. In the meantime, he added, ''we will not sit by and permit anyone to incite, arm and direct terrorists to mount attacks on Israel and on its soldiers in Lebanon.'' The dispute over water diversion began two weeks ago when the Lebanese began to question work that Israeli military engineering units were doing near the Wazzani River, which feeds into the Litani River. Lebanese reports stated that the work would eventually serve to divert the water to Israel. Military sources here said Israel was digging an antitank ditch. Mr. Shamir declared that Israel was not stealing land and water from Lebanon. ''The waters of the Wazzani springs and the Litani River are flowing just as they did since time immemorial,'' he said. Israel Said to Share Water  ''In fact,'' he went on, ''the very opposite of these charges is the truth, because today Israel is supplying drinking water from Israel proper to several dozen Lebanese villages that had never previously received regular running water.'' The Prime Minister said Israel would ''cooperate with any Government in Lebanon that is willing to talk with us with a view to reaching mutual security arrangements in the south.'' Meanwhile, he said, ''we will continue to protect our interests to the best of our capacity.'' Visitors to the south say that Israel is reducing its presence by cutting its forces, withdrawing somewhat from urban areas and turning over some security duties to the South Lebanese Army, a predominantly Christian militia supported by Israel. Hardly a day passes, however, without a report of conflict in the area."
