"To the Editor: James David Barber's Op-Ed article, ''The Soul of Foreign Policy: Rights'' (Oct. 29), though an eloquent call for greater respect for human rights, inaccurately characterizes the Turkish Government as doing little to halt alleged torture in its prisons. Nothing can be further from the truth. The Turkish Government and Turkey's democratically elected Parliament are committed to the preservation of human rights for all citizens. Article 17 of the Turkish Constitution unequivocally prohibits inhumane treatment of those incarcerated in penal institutions. The Turkish Government welcomes information regarding instances of alleged mistreatment. Every claim brought to its attention is thoroughly and expeditiously investigated, and where mistreatment has occurred, damages have been awarded to the victims and their family members. To date, 102 security officials have been sentenced to prison for violating the human rights of prisoners. Mr. Barber's assertion that Turkish law-enforcement officials are allowed to detain suspected criminals, incommunicado, for 45 days is also untrue. Article 19 of the Turkish Constitution requires that individuals who are arrested or detained must be brought before a judge within 48 hours. Some allegations of mistreatment have been embraced and publicized by certain human-rights groups without any apparent effort to validate them. Such credulous acceptance of allegations as fact undermines the credibility that genuine human-rights advocacy requires if it is to have lasting beneficial impact.  It appears that the restoration of peace and tranquillity in Turkey bothers certain quarters. A vast coalition - comprising terrorists who fled Turkey and took refuge in Europe under the guise of political dissidents, certain ethnic groups traditionally hostile to Turkey and ideological circles whose main interest lies in destablilizing Turkey - is conducting a campaign of defamation and vilification against Turkey. Allegations that include torture in Turkish prisons should be assessed by taking into consideration the relentless anti-Turkish campaign conducted by this coalition.  A recent observation by Elliott Abrams, U.S. Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights, is most pertinent: ''Some who criticize Turkey's human-rights situation have no interest in human rights in Turkey or anywhere else. They simply use this issue as a weapon with which to attack a vital member of the Western alliance.'' Over the course of the last few months, your Op-Ed pages have contained biased views on Turkey's allegiance to democratic principles and human rights without response by the Turkish Government. We hope this effort to set the record straight is met with the sense of fairness and responsibilty for which The Times is well known. SUKRU ELEKDAG Ambassador of the Turkish Republic Washington, Nov. 7, 1984"
