"A survivor of the Treblinka death camp approached a war-crimes suspect on trial here today, rejected the man's outstretched hand and, standing inches away from him, testified that he had no doubt the accused man had been a guard at Treblinka. The survivor, Eliyahu Rosenberg, a 65-year-old Israeli, was testifying in the trial of John Demjanjuk, 66, a former auto worker from Cleveland. Mr. Rosenberg served 11 months at the Treblinka camp during World War II, before escaping in an uprising in 1943. Mr. Demjanjuk, who was extradited from the United States last year, is accused of being the Ukrainian guard called Ivan the Terrible, who operated the gas chamber at Treblinka and abused prisoners. Outstretched Arm Spurned Prosecutors asked Mr. Rosenberg today to identify the accused man. Mr. Demjanjuk was asked to remove his glasses, and Mr. Rosenberg approached him, spurning his outstretched arm. ''Ivan!'' Mr. Rosenberg said emotionally. ''I have no shadow of a hesitation or a doubt. It is Ivan from Treblinka, from the gas chambers - the man that I am looking at this very moment. I saw the eyes, the murderous eyes and the face. And how dare you give me a hand, you murderer.'' Mr. Demjanjuk says he is the victim of mistaken identity and denies ever being at Treblinka, the death camp in German-occupied Poland where 870,000 Jews were killed. Charged with crimes against humanity and crimes against the Jewish people, he faces the death penalty if convicted. Although Mr. Rosenberg gave a deposition in 1947, saying the guard known as Ivan had been killed in the prisoners' revolt, he said today the information was based on hearsay. He said he learned later, when he attended a war-crimes trial in Dusseldorf, West Germany, in 1964, that the deposition he gave was incorrect. ''Then I saw those guards face to face, and I found out that the story about killing Ukrainians and Germans was fiction, a story,'' Mr. Rosenberg said. Part of Mr. Demjanjuk's defense rests on reports that the guard known as Ivan the Terrible was killed. Earlier today, Mr. Rosenberg described to the court how guards at Treblinka forced him to remove corpses of other Jews from the gas chambers. Mr. Rosenberg said he first saw the gas chambers in 1942, when he was brought there from the Warsaw ghetto with his mother and sisters. Once there, he was separated from his family, who died at the camp. At first, he and other Jewish prisoners were forced to bury the corpses in mass graves. Later, the Nazis changed tactics and prisoners were forced to shove the bodies into incinerators, Mr. Rosenberg said. He said he once received 30 lashes from the guard named Ivan, because he stole some bread. The guard forced him to count each lash aloud and say ''thank you'' at the end of the beating. ''I remember Ivan very well in this inferno,'' Mr. Rosenberg said. ''I saw him near the gas chamber with a murderous instrument, a sort of pipe or whip, I saw how he beat, shouted and slashed at victims as they entered the gas chamber.'' Mr. Rosenberg was the second survivor to testify at the seven-day-old trial."
