"Ten days before crucial parliamentary elections, a controversy has erupted in France over the Government's efforts to free four French hostages held in Lebanon. A Moslem extremist group said Wednesday that one of the four had been ''executed.'' There was still no confirmation by the French Government today that the hostage, Michel Seurat, 38 years old, had been killed, although the Islamic Holy War group, which said it had been holding him, reported the killing in a statement made public in Beirut. But there was growing pessimism in Paris today about Mr. Seurat's fate. Mary Seurat, his wife, interviewed by the French radio today, said she feared that her husband was dead and criticized the Government of Francois Mitterrand for its conduct in negotiations to win the release of the hostages. Foreign Minister Roland Dumas said France would spare no effort to verify the authenticity of the Islamic group's ''abominable claim.'' Support for Iraq in War The killing was described in the Islamic Holy War statement as an execution. It was also called a retaliatory blow against France for its bias toward Iraq in the Iran-Iraq war and for its expulsion of two dissident Iraqis to Baghdad on Feb. 19. Iraq's Ambassador to France, Mohammed al-Machatt, said the two men, Hamza Fawzy, 38, and Hassan Kheir Eddine, 36, were alive in prison in Iraq. But Amnesty International, the human rights group, reported that at least one of the two had been executed shortly after his arrival there. Today, Mr. Dumas defended the decision to expel the two. ''The police services made no mistake,'' the Foreign Minister asserted. The two Iraqis, he said, did not protest their expulsion, ''except when they climbed into the plane.'' He said his Government had received assurances from Iraq that both men were being treated well. French television reported tonight, however, that both had requested political asylum in France the day before their expulsion, asserting that their lives would be in danger in Baghdad. French police ignored their plea, according to the news, Antenne 2. Picked Up After Bombings The two men were among 13 foreigners and 51 French citizens picked up after a spate of bombings in February in Paris's busiest commercial areas. In another matter connected to France's role as Iraq's major Western arms supplier in the Persian Gulf war, France announced today that it would take legal action against a French export company for illegally selling weapons to Iran. A statement issued by the Defense Ministry said the French export company Luchaire had used false papers to ship arms from the port of Cherbourg to ''a country with which they were not authorized to trade.'' The Defense Ministry said that the company had been under investigation for several months, and that it had been refused new licenses for arms shipments since mid-1985. Company officials could not be reached for comment tonight."
