"Secretary of State Warren Christopher asked Turkish leaders today to cooperate with a detailed American proposal to help end widespread human rights abuses in the country, he and other Administration officials said. At the same time, the United States announced that it would provide Turkey with $336 million in aircraft and other military equipment. Turkish leaders told Mr. Christopher that they would be willing to work with the United States, but made no specific commitments on the plan, senior Turkish officials said. Acting Prime Minister Erdal Inonu strongly defended Turkey's human rights record, telling reporters, ""Today I would challenge any country to come up and say they have a better human rights record than ourselves."" A senior Turkish official dismissed the importance of the United States initiative altogether. ""They're just trying to blow it up as if both sides are working on a plan,"" said the official, who attended today's meetings. ""It's a showpiece."" The State Department's 1992 global human rights report said political murders and extra-judicial killings in Turkey increased last year. It also documented cases of torture, rape and killing of detainees, disappearances of political opponents, arbitrary arrests and detention and denial of fair trial. Mr. Christopher also indicated that the United States would reward better behavior by Turkey, one of America's closest allies, with economic cooperation and favors. He and other senior officials rejected the suggestion, made over the years by human rights organizations, that Turkey be punished with designation as a ""gross"" violator of human rights, which by law could make it ineligible for American military aid. When asked whether American aid should be contingent on an improvement in Turkey's human rights record, Mr. Christopher said human rights have to be ""factored against many other criteria."" A senior Administration official later told reporters that the United States did not consider Turkey a gross violator of human rights. The interchange on human rights was one element of wide-ranging discussions during Mr. Christopher's first official visit here as Secretary of State. One subject was Turkey's frustrations with what its leaders perceive as the inaction of NATO in stopping the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina. President Suleyman Demirel and other senior officials told Mr. Christopher that they expected the United States to do more to end the 14-month-old war in Bosnia, adding that America's global leadership role was more important now than ever before, senior Turkish officials said. The Turks have offered to join the United States and other NATO countries in the air rescue of peacekeepers guarding the ""safe havens"" designated by the United Nations, and would be willing to provide troops as peacekeepers in Bosnia. But Mr. Christopher said the United Nations did not want any Balkan country to take part for historical reasons. As for Turkish participation in providing air cover, he called it a ""NATO decision."" As for the American human rights plan for Turkey, senior Administration officials said it has three goals: to work to eliminate torture in Turkey, to improve freedom of expression and to eliminate disappearances and extra-judicial uses of force and killings. The plan also offered what a senior official called ""suggestions"" on such issues as the monitoring of interrogations, the creation of an independent body to investigate complaints and assistance in training judges and prosecutors. In the first sign that the United States wass prepared to reward good behavior by Turkey, the United States announced today that it would sell five Super Cobra helicopters worth $110 million and parts and supplies for A-10 fighter aircraft worth $167 million. Additionally, the United States is transferring from its used stock 31 older Cobras and 50 A-10 Warthog ground attack planes of the type used in the Persian Gulf war against Iraqi tanks and slow-moving vehicles. That deal is estimated at $59 million. ""Turkey lives in a tough neighborhood,"" Mr. Christopher said."
