"The president of Tunisia, a determined opponent of Islamic fundamentalists in his own country who had been warily watching neighboring Algeria's march toward a fundamentalist government, today called on other Arab countries to repress Muslim militants who use religion as a cover to gain power.  President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali, in an address to interior ministers of 16 Arab countries who are in Tunis to review, among other things, ways of cooperating against Islamic militancy, told the security chiefs: ""We must combine our efforts to struggle against this phenomenon, which is grave for our Arab-Islamic society, by groups using violence and sedition."" While Mr. Ben Ali did not mention Algeria, his remarks indicate the degree of alarm among many Arab chiefs of state - including those of Egypt, Morocco, Jordan and Saudi Arabia - about the rising tide of militant fundamentalism. The Tunisian leader has banned the fundamentalist movement and over the last few months waged a ruthless campaign against an Islamic party, Al Naba, which he has accused of trying to seize power. Hundreds of suspected sympathizers of the group are said to have been arrested, and some human rights organizations have accused Tunisia of torturing some of those it is holding, a charge the Government has denied. Until a few weeks ago, many of the leaders of Al Nahda, including the leading figure, Rachid Ghannouchi, lived in Algiers receiving financial support from the Islamic Salvation Front, which won the first round of elections for Parliament last week by a wide margin. Under pressure from Tunisia, Algeria expelled the movement's leaders. But it is widely expected that if a Muslim fundamentalist government come to power here, the Tunisian fundamentalists, as well as Moroccan fundamentalists, will be allowed to use Algeria as a base for their operations against their governments. Today, suspicion increased here among several diplomats and Algerians that the Government of President Chadli Benjedid, which was surprised by the voter support for the Islamic Salvation Front in the first round of elections, is preparing to abort the second round or to find a way to dilute the fundamentalists' momentum. In last week's elections, the Islamic fundamentalist party won 188 seats of 430 in the new Parliament. With 188 seats to be contested in the second round on Jan. 16, it needs just 28 more for a governing majority. But a Government-appointed Consititutional Council is looking into 341 complaints of fraud in the first round, which could lead to a decision to invalidate as many as 70 of the seats won by the fundamentalists. What is clear, said Algerians in the Government who spoke on condition of anonymity, is that way is being sought to prevent the fundamentalists from winning a majority. That is raising tension here. On Friday and again today, there were reports from several witnesses that army units were moving toward this capital. The units are said to be in suburbs just outside Algiers. The Government has only encouraged speculation over what it might do, in what seems an attempt to provoke the Islamic Salvation Front into reacting and giving the army a credible reason to suppress fundamentalists - something it has done before. The Constitutional Council is supposed to release its decision on the contested seats in the next few days. A delay beyond that would hamper electioneering for the second round."
