"To the Editor: Shimon Peres, Israel's Finance Minister, makes an appeal for peace in ''Ballots, Not Bullets, for the West Bank'' (Op-Ed, Dec. 21) that could best be described with the words he used to dismiss Yasir Arafat's acceptance of Israel: an ''exercise in public relations'' (news story, Dec. 8). To state that the Israelis have long recognized the legitimate rights of the Palestinians is an allegation that none but the most hardened supporters of Israel would accept these days. We have all witnessed on television the scenes of unarmed men, women and children being shot and beaten, houses being demolished and orchards uprooted. Amnesty International's 1988 reports on Israeli human rights abuses cite cases of beatings and torture of Palestinians in prison, arrests without charge and deportations without trial. In the last year alone more than 100 Palestinian charities have been shut down, scores of trade unions and professional societies banned, and schools and universities closed. More harmful to the prospect of stability in the Middle East, though, is the Peres claim that a Palestinian negotiating partner ''remains elusive.'' While the Palestine Liberation Organization has been recognized by the entire world, including the United States, as the legitimate Palestinian negotiating partner, Israel righteously insists on talking, as Mr. Peres puts it, to ''Palestinians who represent their people in a nonviolent way.'' Why then, does the Israeli Government continue to imprison and deport Palestinian professionals and intellectuals who advocate a peaceful settlement? Faisal Husseini, who used to head the Arab Studies Center in Jerusalem, and who spoke out in favor of peace before a meeting of the Israeli group Peace Now, has been held in administrative detention without trial since last July. Tayseer Aruri, professor of physics at Bir Zeit University, who signed a symbolic peace treaty endorsed by dozens of Israeli and Palestinian writers, artists and academics, is fighting deportation orders. After the shock of United States recognition of the P.L.O., the Israelis are scrambling to define a new plan so as not to appear opposed to peace. But the absurdity of Mr. Peres's call for elections ''conducted in an atmosphere of tranquillity and . . . total noninterference'' is highlighted by the daily brutality of Israel's military presence in the occupied territories and the continued incarceration of more than 6,000 Palestinians. One wishes Mr. Peres's words of peace were not simply a public relations ploy, but Israeli policy suggests otherwise. As Yehoshafat Harkabi, former chief of Israeli military intelligence, writes in the book ''Israel's Fateful Hour,'' ''Today, any demand for a settlement without the P.L.O. is equivalent to demanding no settlement.'' KATE SEELYE New York, Jan. 4, 1989   The writer is manager of media relations, American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee."
