"About 135 Timorese protesters against Indonesian rule were arrested last week, and many of them were taken from their homes and beaten by security forces, the religious leader of East Timor said today. ""The military soldiers entered the houses and arrested young people without any kind of explanation,"" Bishop Carlos Felipe Ximenes Belo said in an interview. All of those arrested were beaten, and two or three were hospitalized, he said. Twenty-two were still being held, he said. The police have acknowledged 80 or so arrests. Bishop Belo's comments are likely to give new ammunition to overseas human rights groups that have long condemned what they say is repression in East Timor, a former Portuguese colony that was invaded by Indonesia in 1975 and annexed the following year. The Bishop, who heads the most powerful institution outside of the Government in this predominantly Roman Catholic area, spoke today as the capital city quietly began its work week after a week of sporadic protests and rioting. The events last week called the world's attention to East Timor while President Clinton and other leaders were gathered in Jakarta, Indonesia's capital, for a Pacific region economic conference. The protesters are calling for independence for East Timor. Bishop Belo, 46, who is popular and well respected here, has been walking a tightrope for the last week, people who know him say. A native of East Timor and a fervent opponent of its annexation, he has been under pressure from the Government of Indonesia and has been trying to restore calm. In his sermon on Sunday, and in a pastoral letter last week, he appealed for restraint. But this morning, he vented his frustration at the Government and said it was an act of courage for East Timorese people to speak up. Some people here, and some human rights groups abroad, say Indonesia has become more restrained inthe last year. People no longer suddenly disappear. The police confronting protesters use shields and tear gas but not guns. And the International Committee of the Red Cross has access to prisoners. But when asked about these developments, and whether the Government has changed, Bishop Belo replied, ""They are the same -- the same attitude."" Col. Kiki Syahnakri, the military commander in East Timor, said in an interview today that the people arrested last week were not political protesters but rather ""criminals"" who had engaged in a separate ethnic clash on Nov. 13 and had vandalized the shops of non-Timorese. The commander said that in general, what has been reported about human rights abuses in East Timor is a ""big lie,"" and that he had re-emphasized to soldiers last week that they should show restraint. Bishop Belo conceded that ethnic tensions and unemployment have contributed to the unrest, and he condemned Timorese who engaged in the vandalism. But the Bishop said that the fundamental problem is the lack of political self-determination. The solution, he said, would be a vote on independence. He said he could not predict the results, saying there are Timorese who favor integration with Indonesia. The Bishop said President Clinton did not go far enough in his meeting with President Suharto of Indonesia about East Timor. ""He should be more direct,"" the Bishop said. ""He should say they should withdraw from East Timor."""
