"French Catholic Church Apologizes for Holocaust The Roman Catholic Church in France apologized for being at fault during the French collaboration with the Holocaust. The statement was an extraordinary admission of responsibility in a country that has struggled to come to terms with the actions of its World War II Government.   A1 Israel Frees Hamas Founder Israel freed the jailed founder of the Islamic militant Hamas movement, flying him in a helicopter to Jordan because of what it said was his worsening health. An Army statement said Sheik Ahmed Yassin was flown to Amman in answer to a request by King Hussein to take positive steps to help Middle East peacemaking.    A5  Blair Promises a Model Britain Speaking to cheering delegates at the Labor Party's annual conference, Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain pledged to run ""one of the great, radical, reforming governments in British history."" Mr. Blair has an approval rating of 77 percent.   A6 Counter-Coup in Belgrade Yugoslavia's president, Slobodan Milosevic, and his allies consolidated their power by ousting the reformer who had become mayor of Belgrade after months of demonstrations last winter. Mr. Milosevic also regained control of a television station. The moves were made possible by a split in prodemocracy forces.   A6 A Slap at China Policy The House Committee on International Relations approved a bill denying visas to Chinese officials who violate human rights. The move was meant to challenge President Clinton's China policy as the Administration prepared for a visit a month from now by President Jiang Zemin of China. But the bill's chances were considered uncertain in the House and slimmer in the Senate.   A9 India, Pakistan Exchange Fire Pakistan and India exchanged cross-border artillery barrages in the disputed region of Kashmir, leaving up to 21 people dead and 37 injured, reports from the two sides said. Each side accused the other of instigating the latest border clash. India and Pakistan have fought two wars in the last 50 years over Kashmir. India accuses Pakistan of arming and training rebels in the region, which Pakistan denies. The episode came a week after the Prime Ministers of India and Pakistan met in New York in an effort to bring such incidents under control.   (AP) Congo May Reject U.N. Team The President of Congo, Laurent Kabila, indicated that he plans to seek the withdrawal of a United Nations team investigating alleged massacres in his nation, the former Zaire. ""We request Kofi Annan,"" the United Nations Secretary General, ""to ask them to leave,"" Mr. Kabila said.The team to investigate alleged massacres of Rwandan refugees has been in Congo for nearly six weeks seeking Government clearance to begin its investigation.   (Reuters) Deadline on Welfare Law Looms for Many States With an Oct. 1 deadline looming, fewer than half the states say they will meet all the ambitious work goals embedded in last year's welfare law, creating a politically awkward situation for President Clinton and for some governors. The conservative supporters of the law are urging the Administration to impose financial penalties on non-compliant states.   A1 Trade Accords Lack Support The Republican leaders of both the House and Senate said legislation giving the President renewed authority to negotiate global trade accords had failed to gain enough support in Congress and blamed President Clinton for not doing enough to win Democrats to the cause.   A1 Support for Immigration Study A Federal advisory panel called for a major campaign to integrate new immigrants into American society, and it won support from an influential Republican Congressman for its proposal to dismantle the Immigration and Naturalization Service.   A20 Israel Won't Extradite Suspect Israel has decided not to extradite a Maryland high school student wanted for murder in the dismemberment of another teen-ager, saying he would be tried there instead.   A12 'Soft Money' Ban Unlikely Walter F. Mondale and Nancy Kassebaum Baker urged senators to restrict unregulated donations to political parties, but insiders said that the sponsors had not rounded up enough votes to pass such legislation.   A20 Bishops Urge Support for Gays Catholic bishops are advising parents of gay children to put love and support for their sons and daughters before church doctrine that condemns homosexual activity.   A14 House Approves Spending Bill The House approved a $31.7 billion spending bill for the Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, setting up a clash with the Administration over a provision that would restrict the use of statistical sampling in the next census.   A23 Boy's Murder Stirs Debate On School Fund-Raising The death of an 11-year-old boy who disappeared while selling candy for his school in Jackson, N.J., has stirred soul-searching among school officials and parent groups, who say that although they do not want students soliciting door to door, they rely on fund-raising drives to pay for everything from playground equipment to class trips.   B1 M.T.A. to Block Some Ads Over the objections of gag-wearing free-speech advocates, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority adopted new rules allowing transit officials to reject advertising for the subway, buses or trains that might be offensive to ""a significant segment of the public."" The new rules also allow the transit agency to reject ads that it believes could hurt its business -- a provision that some advocacy groups said could be used to censor ads critical of the M.T.A.'s performance.   B3 Immigrants Begin an Exodus Changes in immigration rules have prompted many illegal immigrants in the New York area and across the country to return to their homelands in the last week, believing that such a move -- however painful -- is their best hope for someday returning legally.   B1 New Life for Jewish Schools The New Atlanta Jewish Community High School, which greeted its first students this month, is a revealing window into a striking resurgence in Jewish education. Nearly 40 Jewish private schools have opened in New York, Atlanta, Baltimore, New Haven, Boston and other cities over the last six years with many others on the way.   A24 Fur Makes a Comeback Fashion is placing its bets on fur, so recently a pariah in the industry: fashion magazines sold more pages advertising fur this fall than they have in recent memory; many more designers now use fur in their collections and sales are on the rise.   A1 Judge Rules Against Toy Chain Toys ""R"" Us, the dominant player in the nation's cutthroat toy business, violated Federal trade laws by colluding with manufacturers to keep prices for Barbie, Mr. Potato Head and other popular toys artificially high, a Federal judge ruled.   A1 No Change on Interest Rates The Federal Reserve voted to keep interest rates unchanged, again showing its willingness to tolerate strong growth as long as there are no clear signs of inflation.   D1 Business Digest   D1 Yankees Win Series Opener The Yankees came back from a 6-run deficit to defeat the Cleveland Indians 8-6 at Yankee Stadium in the first game of their American League playoff series. C1 Editorials: Trent Lott's poison pill; aim sanctions at Iran, not France; Gail Collins on Betsy McCaughey Ross. Columns: William Safire, Maureen Dowd. Chronicle   B2 Metro. Diary   B3 Crossword   E7 Weather   B6"
