"To the Editor:  Eric M. Breindel (''Israel Cannot Afford to Pull 'Iron' Punches,'' Op- Ed, March 28) blunders badly in his ahistorical analysis of the South Lebanese resistance movement and comes off intellectually cheap in his apologia for the Israeli ''iron fist'' policy. He tries to whitewash Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon with the worn-out claim that it was necessitated by Palestinian rocket attacks on Israeli settlements in the Galilee - when it is well known that the Palestinians had honored a U.S.-arranged cease-fire along the border for a year before the invasion. He portrays the ''installation of a 'friendly,' pro-Western government'' as a ''political aspiration that attended that undertaking'' - as if the ''aspiration'' to set up an Israeli- dominated government in Lebanon was not a premeditated objective. As is well known, the Israeli invasion had two main objectives: (1) Destruction of the Palestine Liberation Organization - not because it menaced the Galilee, as in fact it did not, but because the international consensus on Palestinian national rights and recognition of the P.L.O. as the Palestinians' representative alarmed the Israelis, who have consistently denied Palestinian national rights. The Israelis thought that if they could destroy the P.L.O., this would in turn destroy those national claims within Israeli-occupied Palestine and convert the Palestinians into an ethnic minority, deserving, at best, limited local autonomy. (2) Establishment of a lackey Lebanese state, dominated by a ''Christian'' minority, which would recognize Israel and provide it with a means to penetrate Arab markets, necessary for Israeli economic well-being and the establishment of Israeli subimperialism in the area. On these objectives, the Israelis had the long-nurtured cooperation of the Lebanese ''Christian'' Front and forces led by Bashir Gemayel. They also enjoyed the support of a large portion of the Lebanese Shiites, who believed they could find their way into the Lebanese power structure via Israel and the Gemayels. Nonetheless, both objectives were neutralized. The Shiites soon realized that Israeli occupation meant repression, destruction of the fragile south Lebanon economy and degradation of their daily life. Exercising the internationally recognized right to resist occupation and to liberate their land, a combination of progressive parties, the Amal movement and, to a lesser extent, the Hezballah (Party of God), embarked on driving the Israelis and this proxy ''South Lebanon Army'' out of southern Lebanon. How is this any different from European resistance movements to German occupation in World War II? Mr. Breindel reduces all resisters to Israeli oppression to terrorists, hence making the ''iron fist'' policy appear a commensurable response. He draws a false analogy in asking, ''How, after all, would Americans want Washington to respond if the northern tier of the United States . . . was subjected to persistent rocket attacks from bases in Canada?'' The Lebanese resistance movement is a rational response to the terrorism of Israel; the ''iron fist'' policy is the mad rampage of a bleeding bully. ELAINE C. HAGOPIAN Public Affairs Chair Association of Arab-American University Graduates Belmont, Mass., April 1, 1985"
