"Reports of atrocities in detention centers set up in what was once Yugoslavia have struck a sensitive nerve in Israel, evoking memories of Nazi concentration camps and leading many people to say that their country has a special moral obligation to send help. On Wednesday, the Israeli Parliament met specifically to discuss the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and Foreign Minister Shimon Peres announced that Israel would supply food and medical assistance to the war-torn region. It was an occasionally impassioned debate, one that continued in public print and on the airwaves, with some political figures and academicians suggesting that Israel should go so far as to send air force planes to bomb Serbian targets in defense of Bosnia, where most of the victims are Muslims. Among those raising such questions were left-wing lawmakers who often accuse Israel itself of human rights violations in its treatment of Palestinians in the occupied territories. There were no plans, Government officials said, to send anything more than an unspecified amount of humanitarian aid, whose delivery will be coordinated with the United Nations. ""The reports of murder and suffering of those detained in Bosnia can only cause everyone in the world, and especially Jews, to feel revulsion to the depths of their souls,"" Mr. Peres said. His ministry's director general, Yosef Hadass, said that ""as a Jewish state we look after the Jews, but in this case our aid will not be limited to Jews -- it will go to Christians and also to Muslims."" Keen attention has been paid here to the news accounts of systematic murder and torture by Serbs, whose use of the term ""ethnic cleansing"" has sent a chill through many Israelis who were victims of similarly labeled purgings by the Nazis five decades ago. ""The men are tortured and executed by attaching their bodies to high-voltage wires, all by the horrible methods used by the Nazis during the Holocaust."" said Rafi Elul, a Labor member of Parliament. ""The world is silent. Israel cannot be silent."" Aryeh Barnea, head of a group called the Movement for Remembering the Lessons of the Holocaust, urged Israel to bring hundreds of sick and wounded children from Bosnia and Croatia for medical treatment here. ""This has a moral element of course, but also a political element,"" Mr. Barnea told Israel radio. ""After we do something like this, we should say to the United States: 'We the small ones, have done our part and saved 500. Now you should do your part and save 50,000.' "" He also called for a rapid airlift to bring to Israel the estimated 5,000 or more Jews living in former Yugoslav territory. But Uri Gordon, who is in charge of immigration for the Jewish Agency, said that this would be difficult because most Jews in Yugoslavia are highly assimilated and have little sense of identity with Israel. Nonetheless, Israel in recent weeks has evacuated dozens of Yugoslav children, 154 of whom are now in boarding schools and youth villages."
