"A prominent Palestinian advocate for human rights detained in Gaza has smuggled out a note saying he was beaten in custody, rights groups said today. The rights advocate, Dr. Eyad Sarraj, a psychiatrist who heads the Palestinian Independent Commission for Citizens Rights, was arrested at his home last Sunday, his third detention in six months. His office at the Gaza Community Mental Health Program, which he directs, was searched on Monday. Israeli and Palestinian rights groups said that in a note smuggled from his place of detention, Dr. Sarraj said he had been severely beaten and pressured to confess to possession of illegal drugs. The commission said it had received a note in Dr. Sarraj's handwriting saying that he had been beaten, that officials were ""trying to frame me on drugs"" and that ""the situation is dangerous."" Mr. Sarraj's lawyer, Raji Sourani, said he had not been able to see his client since his arrest. Palestinian officials had no comment today on Dr. Sarraj's assertions. Khaled al-Qidra, the attorney general of the Palestinian Authority, said Dr. Sarraj had been found in possession of ""illegal substances,"" and police officials asserted that they had found hashish during a search of his office. Dr. Sarraj's previous detentions came after he publicly criticized the human rights record of the Palestinian Authority. Last month he was jailed for nine days after the publication of a May 6 column by Anthony Lewis on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times in which Dr. Sarraj called the authority ""corrupt, dictatorial, oppressive."" The detentions followed a pattern of arrests of human rights workers and journalists in Gaza and the West Bank who have been critical of the authority. While those arrests were not accompanied by physical violence or criminal charges, the reported beating of Dr. Sarraj and the accusation of drug-possession indicated that his case may follow a different course. Yasir Arafat, the president of the authority, appointed the commission, but it operates independently of the Palestinian Authority."
