"An Israeli court today convicted John Demjanjuk, a 68-year-old retired auto worker from Cleveland, of committing war crimes at the Treblinka death camp more than 40 years ago. Mr. Demjanjuk, who will be sentenced next Monday, could face death by hanging. The verdict today convicted him of crimes against the Jewish people, crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes against a persecuted people. The verdict ended Israel's first war-crimes trial since that of Adolf Eichmann in 1962. ''We determine conclusively, without hesitation or doubt, that the accused is Ivan, who was known as 'Ivan the Terrible,' gas chamber operator at the Treblinka death camp,'' said Dov Levin, the presiding judge. Jewish prisoners at the Treblinka death camp named their guard Ivan the Terrible. The spectators at the trial, some of whom listened for 10 hours as the three judges read from the verdict, which was more than 400 pages long, stood and applauded the ruling. They were immediately silenced by the judges. 'I Am Innocent' Mr. Demjanjuk, who has a bad back, listened to the proceedings while lying on a cot in a nearby room, his lawyers said. After the verdict, as he was led across the stage of the concert hall where the trial was held, Mr. Demjanjuk waved his hands at the television cameras, smiled and said: ''I am not Ivan the Terrible. I am innocent.'' And then in Hebrew, he repeated, ''I am not Ivan the Terrible.'' The verdict ended a trial that lasted 15 months, filled 10,000 pages of court documents and captured the attention of the Israeli public. Many listened as the graphic testimony of witnesses was broadcast over Israeli radio. Mr. Demjanjuk's defense attorneys said they would appeal. ''I am totally surprised at the brutality of the decision taken by the State of Israel against John Demjanjuk,'' said John Gill, Mr. Demjanjuk's lawyer. ''We certainly will appeal.'' Referring to the possible death sentence that Mr. Demjanjuk faces, Mr. Gill added: ''The way the court acted, we expect the worst.'' Mr. Gill, an American, said the judges had relied heavily on the identifications made by Jews who survived the Treblinka death camp. He said such identifications were unreliable. Mr. Demjanjuk's wife, Vera, his son, John Jr., 22, his daughter Lydia Maday, and two sons-in-law, Ed Nishnic and Andrij Maday, were present most of the day but left the hall at 3 P.M., five hours before the verdict was read. Carried by Police Just before 8:30 A.M. today, six policemen carried Mr. Demjanjuk into the converted concert hall and across the stage where the trial was held after the defendant refused to get out of the van that had brought him to Jerusalem. Mr. Demjanjuk said his back hurt. The court's decision to read extensively from the verdict seemed designed to show that although the trial was emotionally charged, the verdict was balanced. The ruling explained why the court believed the identifications made in court by Treblinka survivors, especially those of Pinhas Epstein, Yehiel Reichman and Josef Czarny. Despite the many years that have passed since World War II, ''All the horrific scenes they witnessed are as a fire imprisoned in their bones, etched deep in their memories,'' the judges said. ''These witnesses live their experiences constantly. They will never forget.'' In addition, the court determined that Mr. Demjanjuk's alibi, which was inconsistent in places and at odds with his previous testimony, was untrue. Document Ruled Authentic The court declared authentic an identity card issued to Mr. Demjanjuk when he was trained as a guard by the Nazis during the war. The defense, which said Mr. Demjanjuk never set foot in Treblinka and spent most of the war in a prison camp, asserted that the identity card was forged by the K.G.B. to incriminate Mr. Demjanjuk because he was a Soviet expatriate. The verdict also pointed to incriminating statements made by the defendant to the Israeli police. Mr. Demjanjuk reportedly told his interrogators: ''Why do you make such a big thing out of my issue? Like with Eichmann? Eichmann was big, while Ivan was little, and anyway it's not him, there is a mistake of identity.'' The months of testimony indicated that Mr. Demjanjuk was a vicious guard who acted with ''a great deal of enthusiasm,'' the court said. Witnesses described how Mr. Demjanjuk forced many Jewish prisoners into gas chambers and abused them without mercy. More than 800,000 Jews died at Treblinka, in Nazi-occupied Poland. According to the verdict, Mr. Demjanjuk was a guard at the camp in 1942 and 1943. Mr. Demjanjuk, who was born in the Ukraine, moved to the United States after World War II and became a naturalized citizen. In 1976, authorities identified him as the former death camp guard. He was stripped of his citizenship in 1981 after admitting to immigration officials that he he had lied about his wartime past. In 1986, he was extradited to Israel to stand trial. ''If he was a small cog in the machine, it is those small cogs precisely that were the hierarchy of the killings,'' Mr. Czarny, one of the Treblinka witnesses, said after the verdict. ''Without all those faithful helpers, it could have been very different.'' Breaking down in tears, he said, ''I live it each day, I carry it on my shoulders, I see myself as a live torch.''"
