"To the Editor: The assassination of Anwar el-Sadat has prompted the most profuse outpouring of encomia in recent years. The horror of assassination has become too commonplace in the modern world, and we are repelled by such actions, especially when directed against world leaders. But such a death, however tragic, does not by itself raise its victim to the status of sainthood, and we must not allow the details of that death to blur those of the life which preceded it. {resident} Sadat is being eulogized as a man of great courage and a man of peace. Indeed, his efforts to reach peace with Israel merit great praise, requiring a great deal of courage in the face of opposition from the rest of the Moslem world. Such efforts, however, were not isolated events. Eight years ago, on Yom Kippur, the holiest day on the Jewish calendar, Sadat launched a cowardly attack on Israel with the aim of achieving his political aims by military means. Many good people on both sides lost their lives in the war that ensued. Only after failing to achieve his goals by the sword did he recognize the virtues of the path of peace. Only the means had changed, not the end. It was during a celebration of that unsuccessful war that this ''man of peace'' was shot. While we must not understate the importance of his actions on behalf of a treaty with Israel, neither should we overstate the idealism of the man who undertook those actions. Moreover, before he is beatified as a ''martyr of peace,'' we should remember that he died not at the hands of the enemies of peace - although they rejoiced at his death - but rather as a result of a reaction to acts of political and religious repression so common in the Middle East. Only a month earlier his Government had launched a massive crackdown on political enemies among ''Moslem fundamentalists'' and Coptic Christians. Had such an act occurred behind the Iron Curtain, the Western world would have cried out in anguish over the violations of human rights; had it occurred in one of the right-wing dictatorships of the West, similar hand-wringing would have come from the Soviets and their allies. Indeed, had a single Arab been detained in Israel, the entire world would have risen up as one to demand Israel's condemnation and isolation at the United Nations. These acts of repression were Sadat's most recent evidence of his view of the path to peace and brotherhood, and they were the reason for his ''martyrdom.'' Let us mourn, then, a world leader who brought us a hope which we had lacked. Let us grieve the possibility that our hope may die with him. But let us not be so blinded by his destination that we forget his route, and the shortcuts which he took along the way.  RICHARD A. ROSEN Mt. Vernon, N.Y., Oct. 11, 1981"
