"International 3-19 A commission has urged the Salvadoran Government to purge over 110 officers from the military, including the Defense Minister, for offenses including human rights abuses.  1 Secretary of State Baker sent a message to Iraq in November 1989 telling the Iraqis that the U.S. had just approved new grain credits and seeking their help in persuading Palestinians to take part in peace talks with Israel, a newly declassified document shows.  1 Days before Iraq invaded Kuwait, Pentagon officials sought to block a Presidential message to Saddam Hussein. Officials worried it might send a signal that the U.S. would not stand up to Iraqi aggression.  14 The nonstop infighting over the successor to a discredited party leader threatens to paralyze decision-making in Japan.  10 A personality cult seems to be shaping around China's top leader.  10 Growing sign of an accord between Serbs and Croats.  12 Fischer and Spassky play to a draw in Game 24 of chess match.  46 National 20-32 A New York Times/CBS News Poll found that among the probable electorate, President Bush trailed Governor Clinton by only five percentage points.  1 ""Annoy the media,"" Bush cried as he stumped for Southern votes.  24 The Illinois G.O.P. is acutely disappointed in Bush.  26 Up close and in person, it is possible to see more of Governor Clinton than what television captures. There are the signs of his commanding attitude and his surliness when things do not go exactly as he likes.  1 Clinton spent the day stumping as the more credible outsider.  28 Perot and his million-dollar life-story makeover.  28 TV Critic's Notebook: The Perot infomercials.  28 The other alternatives: a rundown of the minor-party candidates.  25 Auto and home insurance premiums are expected to rise in some states, and perhaps become harder to obtain, because of carriers' losses from recent disasters.  1 Justices O'Connor, Kennedy and Souter, appointees of Presidents who sought a conservative revolution on the Supreme Court, have recently acknowledged a debt to two liberals: Justices Brennan and Marshall.  1 Captain Quantrill's bones, or some of them, were laid to rest.  30 Metro 33-47 The tangled drama of Randy Daniels, a newly appointed deputy to Mayor David N. Dinkins, and Barbara Wood, the woman he is accused of sexually harassing, is being discussed among New Yorkers, most pointedly among blacks.  33 New York City's 11 municipal hospitals will gain more fiscal and administrative autonomy under a plan intended to increase efficiency and improve care for the city's poor.  33 The new chaplain of Yale University, the Rev. Frederick Jerome Streets, is the pastor what he calls his ""secular parish."" 33 A city recast in tulips and paint.  35 Obituaries 44"
