"Several months ago, Israelis watching an evening newscast saw Hassan Zubeidi shuffle stiffly onto their television screens, his face frozen in a hollow stare. Mr. Zubeidi, a 34-year-old grocer from the West Bank town of Anabta, had become catatonic after being jailed for a month and interrogated by the Shin Bet, Israel's domestic security service. The report from his house -- a rare look by Israeli television at a Palestinian allegedly mistreated by the Shin Bet -- briefly pierced the secrecy and public indifference that normally cloak interrogations of Arab suspects in the occupied territories. These interrogations, according to human rights groups and former prisoners, routinely involve physical and psychological abuse that has been classified by some critics as a form of torture. Amnesty International, in a human rights report in July, said Palestinian detainees under interrogation are ""systematically tortured or ill treated"" by Israel. The International Committee of the Red Cross, whose representatives regularly visit Palestinian prisoners, has accused Israel of using interrogation methods that violate the Fourth Geneva Convention on treatment of civilians in occupied areas. The reported mistreatment is significantly less severe than the torture documented in other Middle Eastern countries, like Iraq, Syria and Turkey. Official Attitudes Changing But persistent reports and accumulating evidence of abuse, including the deaths of several Palestinians under interrogation in recent years, have produced a gradual change in official Israeli attitudes after years of secrecy and denial. In April, the Government announced that a ministerial committee had revised the confidential guidelines for Shin Bet interrogators, tightening rules based on a 1987 Government commission report that had sanctioned ""moderate physical pressure"" during questioning. In June, a bill banning torture was proposed by several Parliament members, and Justice Minister David Libai appointed a committee to study such legislation. The reported mistreatment of Palestinian prisoners has thus far generated little public protest. For one thing, the Shin Bet is widely viewed by Israelis as an indispensable tool in thwarting deadly Arab attacks. For another, a surge earlier this year in Palestinian killings of Israeli civilians and soldiers seems to have strengthened a popular conviction that the security services must be allowed to do what is necessary to protect Israelis. Torture Charges Denied Officials deny that the Shin Bet uses torture, and point to existing Israeli legislation that prohibits use of force or violence to extract confessions. Israel has also signed the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. In a rare public statement on interrogation techniques, the head of the Shin Bet, whose identity is kept secret, responded recently to a petition to the Supreme Court by the Public Committee Against Torture in Israel, a private human rights group. He asserted in an affidavit that ""special interrogation procedures"" were sometimes needed to foil terrorism. These ""exceptional measures,"" he said, were used selectively to obtain vital information, and only against people suspected of ""serious offenses."" Such offenses are commonly defined by officials as violent attacks on Israelis or Arabs, use of weapons and explosives, aid and transfer of funds to militant groups and leadership of such organizations. But prisoners, their lawyers and human rights groups say that abusive Shin Bet treatment is standard and pervasive, and that similar practices are common in army interrogation centers in the occupied territories. Human rights monitors estimate that 500 Palestinian detainees are subjected to such treatment each month and that at least 30,000 have been interrogated since the beginning of the anti-Israel uprising in December 1987. Methods Described Palestinians who have been questioned by the Shin Bet report that several methods are used during interrogations, which usually last from two weeks to a month. According to these accounts, prisoners are typically held on small chairs, their heads covered with dirty, foul-smelling sacks and their hands shackled behind them to the chair or to a wall. Prisoners report sitting for days in such painful positions, bombarded by loud music interrupted only by interrogation sessions and restricted visits to the toilet, where they were forced to eat their meals. Palestinians also report having been held in closet-sized cells, some of which are kept at low temperatures. Others say that their heads were slammed into walls during questioning, or that they were violently shaken, punched, kicked, choked and hit in the genitals. Although Shin Bet guidelines are secret, there recently has been some official corroboration of prisoner accounts. During the trial in June of a Palestinian in the West Bank town of Hebron, Shin Bet interrogators acknowledged that the suspect had been held without sleep for periods of three and four days while he was hooded and handcuffed to a wall as he sat on a low chair in a tiny cell. In May, an Israeli lawyer got hold of a medical form used at an interrogation center in another West Bank town, Tulkarm. It required prison doctors to note whether detainees were fit to be shackled, hooded and held in isolation cells, whether they could stand for long periods and whether they had injuries before their interrogation. Curbs in New Guideline The Supreme Court affidavit by the head of the Shin Bet revealed that the revised interrogation guidelines prohibit exposure of prisoners to heat and cold and denial of food, drink and access to toilets. The Israeli code's latest revision reflects an apparent trend toward stricter controls over interrogators to prevent excesses that have led to deaths and injuries. But Avigdor Feldman, a civil rights lawyer who is arguing the Supreme Court petition against the interrogation guidelines, said they had led to ""legitimization and bureaucratization of torture without public oversight."" Other critics argue that the new rules have merely led to a shift from beatings to other techniques that leave fewer physical traces. The point, they say, is that the Government still condones questionable practices like hooding, sleep deprivation, subjection to loud music and confinement in awkward positions. ""The Shin Bet has refined its techniques so they have become less discernible, and they have deniability built into them,"" said Kenneth Roth, acting executive director of Middle East Watch, a New York-based human rights group. ""They are more sophisticated, but equally insidious."" Signs of Concern While there has been little demand by politicians and the general public for increased supervision over Shin Bet practices, there are some signs that concern over alleged abuses is spreading. In a letter sent last month to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, Dr. Miriam Zangen, chairwoman of the 12,000-member Israel Medical Association, served notice that the organization would instruct physicians to refuse to cooperate with abusive interrogations. They would also be prohibited from filling out medical forms that pronounce detainees fit for mistreatment, she said. Dr. Ruhama Marton, the Israeli chairwoman of the Association of Israeli-Palestinian Physicians for Human Rights, said her group would press for legislation requiring doctors in hospitals and prisons to report to the police any case of abuse under interrogation of someone that they have treated. ""Behind every interrogator-torturer there is a doctor,"" Dr. Marton told a recent conference on torture in Tel Aviv. ""As citizens of a democracy, we must refuse to cooperate with crimes against human beings."""
