"Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, today denounced an Iranian leader's call for the killing of Westerners in retaliation for Palestinian deaths in the Israeli-occupied territories. ''I reject this call in its totality,'' Mr. Arafat said at a news conference at P.L.O. headquarters here. On Friday, the Speaker of the Iranian Parliament, Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani, called for the assassination of five British, French or American citizens for every Palestinian killed by the Israeli Army in the Gaza Strip or West Bank. He also urged Palestinians to attack American interests worldwide and to hijack planes to attain their rights from Israel. The Rafsanjani statement brought immediate condemnation from Washington, London and Paris. 'Put an End to the Crimes' More than 400 Palestinians have been reported killed since the Palestinian uprising against Israeli occupation began in December 1987. The P.L.O. leader called on the international community ''to act rapidly to put an end to the crimes and the massacres perpetrated by Israel against the population of the occupied territories.'' Asked if he planned to withdraw a recent P.L.O. peace initiative because of the marked increase in violence in the territories, Mr. Arafat said, ''It is an initiative of the Palestine National Council and it is not up to me to modify it.'' Curfew in Territories JERUSALEM, May 7 (Special to The New York Times) - At least 800,000 Palestinians were placed under curfew today in the Israeli-occupied territories after widespread rioting Saturday in the Gaza Strip. The army imposed a curfew on all of Gaza's refugee districts and a few other neighborhoods, an army spokesman said. The army also imposed curfews on several West Bank cities, including Nablus, Jenin and Tulkarm. In the Gaza Strip on Saturday, three Palestinians were shot and killed and more than 150 were injured. The Gaza Strip today was quieter, Palestinians said, probably because residents were locked in their homes. Still, eight people were wounded in clashes with Israeli troops, they said. At the same time, hundreds of Israeli soldiers continued searching for a soldier who disappeared in the middle of last week. They found the body today of another soldier who disappeared in mid-February. The body of Avi Sasportas was found buried under several feet of dirt not far from where he was last seen, near Ashkelon in the northern Negev. The exact cause of death has not been determined yet, but Israel radio reported that a knife was found near his body."
