"President Clinton, seeking to pre-empt Congressional action, imposed sweeping new sanctions on the Sudan today, for alleged sponsorship of terrorism and human rights abuses. The new penalties went far beyond previous prohibitions by blocking access to all Sudanese assets in the United States and barring a wide range of financial transactions, officials said. The United States has only $70 million in annual trade with the Sudan, including $50 million in American exports, American officials said. Therefore, the move ""is more a statement of principle than anything else,"" an official said. ""The United States has imposed sweeping new economic sanctions against the Government of Sudan because of its continued sponsorship of international terrorism, its effort to destabilize neighboring countries and its abysmal record on human rights,"" Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said in making the announcement. ""We take these steps because the Government of Sudan has failed to respond to repeated expressions of concern or to the imposition of lesser sanctions."" The action provides exceptions for some activity considered essential to American interests, like imports of gum arabic, a key ingredient in candy and some other products, like ink. It is not expected that there will be any exception for American oil investment in the Sudan, a senior American official said. The United States contends that Sudanese officials aided those responsible for an 1995 assassination attempt against President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt. It has also accused the Sudan of providing a refuge and training for Islamic guerrillas. Experts and some published reports have raised suspicions about whether the Sudan is trying to acquire a chemical weapons industry, but the United States has refused to comment on that question. The State Department spokesman, James P. Rubin, said he hoped that the President's move would make it unnecessary for Congress to legislate sanctions, which could tie the Administration's hands even more. ""We tend to not, as a matter of practice, support sanctions put in place by Capitol Hill because of the fact that they normally lack flexibility,"" he said. The sanctions took effect today after Mr. Clinton signed an executive order under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act blocking Sudanese assets in the United States, believed to total millions of dollars, and banning bank loans and American exports to the Sudan. Imports from Sudan were also barred. Ms. Albright said sanctions aimed to deprive the Sudanese Government ""of the financial and material benefits of U.S. trade and investment, including"" oil. But ""to insure flexibility, the Administration will consider issuing licenses on a case-by-case basis for activities that are in the U.S. interest,"" she added. Mr. Rubin said that for certain specific commodities, like gum Arabic, the Administration would consider issuing licenses for ""some limited activities important to us,"" he said. A coalition of American businesses has lobbied hard against sanctions that would hit the trade in gum arabic. A senior American official said the Administration would strictly review the requests for exemptions. American companies have 30 days to divest themselves of investments in the Sudan or apply for a special license, officials said. The Sudan is one of seven nations that Washington accuses of sponsoring worldwide terrorism and having poor human rights records."
