"A United Nations report issued here today estimates that 7,000 people, most of them opponents of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's Government, were executed in Iran after the ouster of the Shah in 1979. It charged that torture and summary executions remained widespread. The report, prepared by a special envoy appointed by the 43-nation United Nations Commission on Human Rights last year, said that according to some sources, the figure of executions could be ''much higher.'' It cited many instances in which victims were said to have died from shooting, stoning, hanging or burning or after having been severely tortured and abused sexually, in some cases over several years. It also indicated, however, that the number of executions began to decline from several thousand a year in the period beginning in 1979 to about 500 in 1984, and that a slight decrease had progressed through 1985 and 1986. But it added that such human rights violations were undoubtedly continuing. The report provided detailed figures of executions in 1985, including locations and affiliations of the victims with opposition groups including the Communist Tudeh Party, the People's Mujahedeen and the Bahai International Community. It is to be discussed by the commission at its annual six-week session, which began here Feb. 3. Information for the report came primarily from witnesses who had escaped from Iran after being imprisoned, Amnesty International, representatives of banned Iranian organizations and others opposed to the Government, it said. The Iranian authorities did not allow the United Nations representative to visit the country. But the report said recent contacts with the authorities had indicated a ''positive approach'' on the possibility of a visit. The report said that while torture aimed at obtaining confessions was forbidden under Iran's Constitution, information received by the United Nations representative ''contained numerous detailed allegations of widespread torture and ill-treatment, particularly affecting imprisoned members or supporters of political opposition groups or members of religious or ethnic minorities.'' Aimed at Forcing Confessions Most of the torture was aimed at extracting confessions or the names of other members of the detainee's group, according to information provided by former prisoners and others who had escaped from Iran. The report said torture could occur immediately after arrest, in the pre-trial period or during a prison term. In some cases, it said, victims were tortured in front of family members, or family members were tortured in front of detainees to force confessions or information. The report also described situations in which victims were arrested, often while in the company of their families, and taken to prison to wait for long periods before coming to trial. In most cases, it said defendants were denied right to legal counsel during their trials and in some cases were brought to court blindfolded. While observing that its information indicated a reduction in human rights violations over the last two to three years, the report said there was little doubt that serious incidents persist. It called on the commission to try and press the Iranian authorities to allow a United Nations visit. ''It must be concluded that even if, in some cases, the numerous and grave allegations of human rights violations in the Islamic Republic of Iran may be considered exaggerated, most of them contain a nucleus of truth,'' it said."
