"President Bush was so determined to avoid plunging into a quagmire like Vietnam that he initially plunged instead into what looked like a glacier of icy indifference to the fate of Iraqi Kurds and Shiites. Now, after an uproar of shock, he has warmed to his humane duty. He has moved to reinforce international rescue operations by ordering the American military to feed and provide sanctuary for the refugees. By doing so at last, he advances his, and the world's, understanding of international law. From Iraq's August invasion of Kuwait until the shooting war ended, Mr. Bush repeatedly and justly branded Saddam Hussein a global outlaw and his aggression a flagrant violation of international law. When the shooting stopped, so did those charges, no matter that the Iraqi dictator then rained misery on his own people. Viewing the Kurdish revolution and its consequences as Iraq's internal affair suited Mr. Bush's determination to avoid the quagmire, but it betrayed an obsolescent view of international law.  Whatever the scope of international law may be, Iraq's aggression was a gross violation. To invade a neighboring state is to shatter longstanding global norms. But what of Saddam Hussein's subsequent domestic oppression of fellow Iraqis, bordering on genocide: does that not likewise offend international rights? No, not even that, according to notions of international law honored until recently. These fixed international legal rights as those of states, not of people. Although the United Nations has proclaimed its concern for human as well as national rights, the scholarly American Law Institute as late as 1965 was defining international law as ""rules and principles of general application dealing with the conduct of states and international organizations."" Not until 1987 did the institute's lawyers add, ""as well as some of their relations with persons."" [Italics supplied.] And now, the stark images of Kurdish refugees have forced yet more humanity on theory. Even as the United Nations declares the shooting over, it expresses institutional concern for starving civilians and its determination to provide some sort of safe haven and relief. In only a handful of cases in U.N. history has the Security Council declared, as it did on April 5, that an ostensibly internal matter posed a threat to international peace. The Kurds may lack military support abroad but they now have the law on their side, international authority for humanitarian assistance independent of the police action over Kuwait's sovereignty. With all the suffering that is now evident on the world's television screens -- indeed because of the suffering -- concern for human rights now transcends borders and political interests, and may be taking hold. That concern could stand even more leadership of the sort President Bush so ably gave to the coalition against aggression. Such new world law comes as a warmly welcome aspect of the new world order."
