"Canada has announced that it will consider granting refugee status to women who are persecuted because of their sex. In connection with what is seen here as a landmark change in Canada's immigration rules, the Government said on Friday that it had given permission for a Saudi woman to remain in Canada after she said she would be in grave danger if she returned to Saudi Arabia because of her views on the status of women there. The woman told immigration officials that she had tried to go without a veil in Saudi Arabia, to travel alone and to pursue a university education in a field of her choice, but was threatened with punishment if she persisted, her lawyer said. The woman's name has not been published. Her lawyer asked that she not be identified because of fears of reprisal against her parents, who are still in Saudi Arabia. Saudi Sees No Danger A spokesman for the Saudi Embassy in Ottawa said he did not think it was ""dangerous"" for the woman to live in Saudi Arabia, adding that not all Saudi women wear veils. The woman did not respond to a request for an interview. But she told The Canadian Press that she was ""excited and happy and relieved"" at the decision. She also said she was happy that Canada was looking at the whole issue of refugee women. The Immigration and Refugee Board had turned down her first request for asylum, and she has been in hiding in Montreal for 21 months. The changes in refugee standards, announced by Bernard Valcourt, the Minister for Education and Immigration, were also welcomed by feminists and human-rights groups, which have sought such action for years. ""Canada may be leading the world in finally realizing that women suffer violations on the basis of their sex and that the well-founded fear of those violations constitutes grounds for asylum,"" said Dorothy Q. Thomas, director of the Women's Rights Project of Human Rights Watch in Washington. Janice Stein, a political science professor and specialist on the Middle East at the University of Toronto, said the implications were ""staggering."" ""If taken literally, the decision could mean that any woman who leaves Saudi Arabia is a potential refugee,"" she said. Many other Islamic countries impose the kind of restrictions on women that Saudi Arabia does. Precedent on Homosexuals Ed Broadbent, president of the International Center for Human Rights and Democratic Development in Montreal, called Canada's action ""a clear move in the right direction,"" adding, ""There is no turning back on the principle that our refugee policy must recognize the full equality of men and women."" A year ago Canada broke ground with a similar action regarding homosexuals: A gay man fearing persecution in his homeland, Argentina, because of his sexual preference was granted asylum. United States law lays out categories under which people suffering well-founded fears of persecution may be admitted. But sex is not a category. The tendency has been to admit women on the traditional basis of persecution for their political views. European nations do not recognize sex-based persecution as grounds for asylum. In a case last year, for example, France rejected a petition from a woman from Mali who fled her family and country rather than undergo a clitoridectomy, the removal of the clitoris and inner labia, which is a widespread ritual. The Government finally gave her a residence permit but declined to recognize that she was being persecuted on the basis of her sex. Broadening the Term 'Refugee' In his statement, Mr. Valcourt noted that new guidelines, which are to be developed within a month, would represent ""appropriate responses to the complex and interrelated issues of state-sanctioned abuse abroad, conjugal violence against women and assistance to female refugees in times of world crises."" The Immigration and Refugee Board has reportedly produced a draft recommendation that the word ""refugee"" include women who can demonstrate that their countries do not provide adequate protection from sexual abuse, domestic violence, genital mutilation and other torture. But there is another way to proceed legally, Canadian officials said: to classify women protesting sex-based persecution as a ""particular social group"" under the United Nations Refugee Convention of 1951, which sets general rules for refugees. European and U.N. Guidelines If such new rules were accepted, women who transgress social customs, for example, by refusing arranged marriages, could claim they were part of a particular group that fears persecution. In 1984 the European Parliament determined that women fearing cruel or inhuman treatment as a result of violating social customs should be considered such a group. The next year Canada endorsed a similar resolution of the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, which indentified ""women asylum-seekers who face harsh or inhumane treatment due to their having transgressed the social mores of the society in which they live"" as a ""particular social group."""
