"Hisham Mubarak is a young Egyptian lawyer who could live a comfortable life in the gracious world of Cairo professionals. Instead he has taken on the job of opposing the brutal tactics used by the Government against its suspected enemies. That is unwelcome, sometimes dangerous work in Egypt. In 1989 Mr. Mubarak helped defend steelworkers who had been arrested for striking. He was then himself arrested, held for two weeks and beaten so badly that he bled from his right ear and suffered permanent hearing loss. The formal charge for that arrest was establishing an illegal organization. Mr. Mubarak is director of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights -- which is still illegal. In 1992 he was threatened by officials for cooperating with the American human rights group Middle East Watch. The Islamic fundamentalists who use violence against the Government are no fonder of Mr. Mubarak. When he was a law student at the University of Cairo in the 1980's, they beat him for advocating freedom of speech and women's rights. Mr. Mubarak was in Boston this week as one of four winners of the Reebok Human Rights Award. I asked him why he was critical of Egyptian Government measures against an extremist movement that would certainly have no time for human rights if it took power. ""The Government has used the same tactics since it imposed a state of emergency in 1981,"" he replied, ""and they haven't worked. You can't fight violence with violence."" In fact, he argued, the official use of mass arrests and torture simply creates more opposition to the Government. He said: ""When a problem erupts, the police arrest young people at random, many of them innocent. That injustice agitates more people. Just making arrests with no legal ground will make some turn violent. ""Then sometimes the police arrest members of a fundamentalist group and kill them for revenge. For example, seven men who were in hiding were found and killed in their sleep. Their families refused to receive the bodies. They want revenge on the Government. So a circle of hatred is created."" Middle East Watch in a recent report listed widespread human rights abuses by Egyptian security forces, such as mass arrests, incommunicado detention and torture. The torture methods include beating on the soles of the feet and electric shocks. In August, Egypt's civilian Supreme State Security Court acquitted 24 Islamic militants of murder charges on the ground that confessions had been extracted from them by what the court president, Judge Wahid Mahmoud Ibrahim, said were the ""ugliest forms of torture."" But lately civilians have been tried in secret by military courts, from which there is no appeal; many have been sentenced to death. ""Torture is a Government policy,"" Mr. Mubarak said. ""It's nothing new in Egypt. The aim is to force the victims to say things the Government wants to hear. It has never worked -- never stopped these people from doing what they do."" The savagery of Egyptian police methods raises awkward questions for the United States. Egypt is an important friend in the Middle East, the first Arab state to make peace with Israel. It receives more than $2 billion a year in U.S. aid, second only to Israel. Does all that make it impossible for us to raise objections to its human rights record? Hisham Mubarak is also a reminder of the risks some people take for the cause of human rights: in Egypt and many other places around the world. The Reebok Awards, the Robert F. Kennedy Awards and others show that there are quite a few such brave men and women. Can they make a difference? Yes they can, even against long odds. Mr. Mubarak is modest, hard to draw out about himself. But I asked Emma Playfair, director of the international organization Interights, who used to be in Cairo. She said: ""It's exactly his modesty that matters. At a time when any human rights work was unpopular and risky, he developed a solid way of documenting violations -- not just passing on claims but checking them, finding other witnesses, being professional. It is still risky, but the idea of human rights has become an issue that people talk about seriously in Egypt."""
