"The five permanent Security Council members are close to agreement on a plan inviting governments to prepare lists of financial claims against Iraq arising out of its occupation of Kuwait as well as lists of human rights violations by Iraqi forces there. The proposed resolution also calls on the Iraqi Government to allow the remaining foreign embassies in occupied Kuwait to be resupplied with food, water and other necessities. It also urges the United Nations Secretary General to continue his efforts to find a diplomatic solution to the gulf crisis within the framework of the Council's existing resolutions that demand Iraq's unconditional withdrawal. The United Nations representatives from Britain, France, the United States, the Soviet Union and China -the five permanent Council members with a veto on decisions - tentatively agreed on the resolution on Wednesday night, diplomats said today. But they reported that Washington had still not accepted the text, although the four other permanent members are ready to vote for it. Administration officials in Washington said Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d had not had time to review the draft resolution. Represents a Compromise The emerging new resolution represents a compromise between differing British and American views of what the Security Council should do next to increase the pressure on Baghdad to withdraw and refocus attention on the gulf crisis after last week's Council vote condemning Israel for the violence in Jerusalem. Last month, Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of Britain called for the Security Council to approve a new resolution that would compensate victims of Iraq's invasion for financial losses they have suffered out of frozen overseas Iraqi assets. She also said President Saddam Hussein and other Iraqi leaders should be tried for war crimes by a Nuremburg-style commission. But the United States asked Britain to tone down these demands. It expressed fears that any new punitive Security Council action against Iraq so soon after last Friday's vote condemning Israel might encourage Arab and other third world countries to press for the Council to take similar mesures against Israel as well. Instead Mr. Baker proposed that the Security Council pressure Baghdad to allow embassies still holding out in Kuwait to be resupplied with food and water. Diplomats say the new resolution represents a compromise between these two view points. For the first time, it establishes the principal that Iraq will be held responsible for the financial consequences of its invasion by saying governments should compile lists of their citizens claims. It also establishes that Iraq will be held accountable for human rights violations by its forces, and notably of the Fourth Geneva Protocol of 1947 governing the treatment of civilians in war zones. Again governments will be invited to prepare evidence."
