"Security agents acting in the name of Yasir Arafat's leadership have banned the sale of books by one of Mr. Arafat's most vocal Palestinian critics, Edward W. Said, adding to the lengthening list of human rights abuses by the Palestinian Authority. Officials and book sellers said the ban began with a raid a month ago on a small bookstore in central Ramallah, a Palestinian-ruled city just north of Jerusalem, in which police officers seized two Arabic-language collections of essays by Mr. Said, a Palestinian scholar and professor of literature at Columbia University. The disclosure of the ban followed several other recent incidents, including the detention of Eyad R. Sarraj, a human rights advocate, the death of a prisoner by torture and the Palestinian Authority's failure to heed an order of the Palestinian High Court to free 10 university students detained without charges since March. The moves have alarmed and angered Palestinians and have drawn complaints from human rights groups. As in the other incidents, it was unclear who ordered the ban on Mr. Said's books, or whether it was an independent initiative by one of the several security services established by Mr. Arafat, which are said to have become increasingly crude and aggressive since the Authority's crackdown on Islamic militants in March. Officials of the Ministry of Information, in whose name the action was taken, said they had not ordered the action. An order by the ministry to return books seized from the Dar al-Fikr shop in Ramallah, on the condition that they not be put on sale, was ignored by the police. Mr. Arafat has not commented on the matter. Ziad Abu Amr, a member of the Palestinian Legislative Council and a professor with a doctorate in political science from Georgetown University, said he intended to raise the book ban at Wednesday's council session, which Mr. Arafat is to attend. ""I don't know whether the security people acted on their own or at the behest of someone else, but whether by mistake or by design, this is very harmful,"" said Mr. Abu Amr. ""These violations are creating anxiety and alarm among Palestinians, not only for themselves, but for the whole Palestinian experience. There was so much enthusiasm after the election, such excitement about building a new society, and now these repeated violations are frustrating expectations. That's the worst thing."" The books by Mr. Said that were seized include two collections of articles sharply critical of the landmark Israeli-Palestinian agreement signed in September 1993. Mr. Said, who until then had been a close ally of Mr. Arafat and a member of the Palestinian parliament-in-exile, asserted that the agreement was an ""instrument of Palestinian surrender"" and that Mr. Arafat had agreed to become ""Israel's enforcer."" Since then, Mr. Said has also frequently accused Mr. Arafat of running an incompetent, brutal and corrupt regime. ""All dictators make the same mistake, thinking they can cut off criticism by putting critics in jail and banning books,"" Mr. Said said today in a telephone interview from New York. ""I think what enraged him is that I have been quite unrelenting, I've made no compromise with what he's done, I've refused to be 'pragmatic,' to 'rally around the leader at a difficult time.' A lot of people are being hurt, are being killed."" Mr. Said said the Israeli-Palestinian negotiating process was now in worse shape than ever before. ""Nothing has come up on the Israeli front to justify to his people the depiction of the peace process as a great success,"" Mr. Said said. ""Most people I know in the West Bank and Gaza and Jericho are discouraged, and turning toward him,"" he continued, referring to Mr. Arafat, ""as a source of discouragement. The abuses by his security people, taking people off in the middle of the night, the cronyism, his high-handed way -- he's become like a little emperor. He took over the whole Ministry of Education in Ramallah as his personal office, and tried to confiscate land to build a residence."" Mr. Said's criticism goes somewhat beyond what is generally heard in the West Bank and Gaza, where objections to Mr. Arafat's methods are mitigated by an awareness of the pressures under which he must operate, most notably the stiff restrictions imposed by Israel over the last half year, and the hard line of the new Israeli Government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Many of the Palestinians detained without trial, for example, were rounded up last March after intense pressure from Israel and the United States for Mr. Arafat to crack down on Islamic militants after a series of suicide bombings in Israel. But there is also no question that the arrogant methods of the Palestinian security services -- and the very number of services, at least 10 -- have irritated and alarmed Palestinians. Diplomats who know Mr. Arafat say he does not seem to understand many of the complaints about his administration, and does not appreciate the damage he is doing to the Palestinian cause. Mr. Arafat has never made clear why he needs so many independent security services, which often appear to act independently of the Palestinian Authority and even in competition with each other. The services include Mr. Arafat's personal guard, known as Force 17; his intelligence service; the Preventive Security Service; the Unit to Fight Drugs and several others organizations. Earlier this month, the death by torture of Mahmoud Jumail, a 27-year-old member of the Fateh Hawks gang in Nablus, brought many of these fears to the surface. Human rights organizations said Mr. Jumayil was the eighth prisoner held by the Palestinian Authority to die under suspicious circumstances. Mr. Jumail was arrested in December when the Palestinian Authority cracked down on the Hawks, which began as an underground armed group under Israeli occupation and evolved into a powerful gang. Like other members of the Hawks, he was held in Jericho. But under conditions that remain unclear, Mr. Jumail was transferred to Nablus by the Palestinian coast guard -- which maintains its own security service -- and there tortured to death. Mr. Jumail's funeral turned into a violent demonstration by 10,000 to 15,000 people. Soon after, three members of the coast guard pleaded guilty to killing him and were sent to prison -- a hasty procedure that drew further criticism from human rights groups. Then another incident occurred in Tulkarm, where a demonstration by relatives of Islamic detainees turned violent and led to the death of a demonstrator. Following those incidents, the Palestinian Legislative Council, which has consistently challenged Mr. Arafat on human rights abuses and other matters, appointed a special committee to investigate. The committee produced a report that sharply criticized the security services and demanded that their role be defined. It also demanded the release of all detainees held without charges. Mr. Arafat reportedly endorsed the report, and 120 prisoners were freed. But the Palestinian High Court then ordered the Palestinian Authority to release another 10 detainees, students held since March. This time, Mr. Arafat did nothing, and the youths remain incarcerated."
