"Egyptian rights campaigners accused the authorities today of beating and torturing a group of 52 journalists, lawyers, students and workers detained after a strike at the country's biggest steel plant. At least one worker was shot dead, several others were wounded and 600 were detained when security forces stormed a plant in Helwan on Aug. 1 and attacked workers protesting conditions. Last Thursday, the authorities announced the arrest of 52 people accused of advocating Communism, an illegal ideology in Egypt, and of seeking to overthrow the Government. The authorities accused members of the group of trying to promote Communism during the one-day stoppage at Helwan, 15 miles southeast of Cairo. Earlier the same week, Attorney General Gamal Shoman announced the detention of 41 members of a purported Shiite Muslim group committed to the same goal of overthrowing the Government and of attacking American, Israeli and other foreign interests here. Human-rights campaigners have said the arrests signal a growing intolerance at a time when Egypt, Washington's most prominent Arab ally, is seized with economic crisis, a wide array of social problems, growing povertry and spreading Islamic revival. The Egyptian Organization for Human Rights, an affiliate of the Arab Organization for Human Rights, said in a statement today that those seized last Thursday included two members of its executive council, Mohammed al-Sayyid Said, a journalist, and Amir Salem, a lawyer. Both had been active in efforts to defend the detained Helwan workers, the statement said. ''All detainees were subjected to indiscriminate beating by a contingent of the central security forces for more than an hour,'' the statement said. ''The 10 who declared hunger strikes were beaten individually and some dragged physically across the floor.'' The statement said the treatment violated conventions against torture. It said a delegation from the Journalists' Syndicate visited the detainess and saw scars on two journalists. The authorities resisted producing Mr. Said, the statement said, but ''when he was finally brought in after nearly two hours his physical condition gave serious cause for concern.'' Egypt is ruled under an emergency decree that gives the authorities wide powers of search and detention. The emergency powers have been used ''to arrest and detain without trial suspected critics or opponents of the Government,'' Amnesty International said in a report in in March. ''Torture and ill treatment of untried political detainees have been widely reported,'' it said."
