"Leaders of the Bahai faith in the United States charge that what they say is an Iranian Government campaign of persecution aimed at destroying their religion in Iran has become more intense and widespread in the last few months. ''It is a kind of holocaust that is going on over there,'' Paul Glist, a lawyer and Bahai leader here, said in an interview this week. ''In this modern world it is hard to believe this is happening.'' Information supplied by Bahais still in Iran, where the religion began in what was then Persia in the mid-19th century, portray a campaign of economic harrassment, property destruction, arrest, abduction, torture and death by firing squad. American Bahais say that the campaign began shortly after the revolution that brought down the Shah in 1979. They say information on the campaign has been collected and documented where possible by the Bahai national headquarters in Wilmette, Ill. Case Taken to the U.N. Last month the Bahais took their case to the United Nations Human Rights Subcommission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities. That subcommission termed the situation of Iranian Bahais ''perilous,'' and called on Secretary General Kurt Waldheim to help protect them. A spokesman for Amnesty International in London, interviewed by telephone, said that his human rights organization had no reason to doubt the charges from the American Bahais, though there was almost no opportunity to monitor the situation firsthand. Western diplomats, including State Department officials who asked not to be identified, said that information was very difficult to obtain since many Western embassies had been scaled down or had ceased to function in Teheran. 'Purely Religious Persecution' ''This is a purely religious persecution,'' Glenford E. Mitchell, the chief executive officer of the American Bahais, said in a telephone interview from Wilmette. ''The Iranian Supreme Court has made it literally a crime to teach the Bahai faith,'' Mr. Mitchell said. Followers of the Bahai faith, the largest religious minority in Iran, are the only group excluded from any protection under the Iranian Constitution. According to Firuz Kazemzadeh, a Bahai of Iranian descent who is a professor of Russian history and chairman of the Committee on Middle Eastern Studies at Yale, the Iranian Government's charges against the Bahais ''are always the same: Zionism and the promotion of prostitution.'' The first charge is based on the historic Bahai friendship with the Jews - the Bahais' world headquarters are in Haifa, Israel - and the second charge on their belief in the equality of women. The Bahai faith, which includes Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Mohammed among its prophets, emphasizes world unity and treats religious truth as an evolving and relative concept. 'Not an Islamic Sect' ''The Bahais are not an Islamic sect, but they were once part of the Moslem nation,'' Professor Kazemzadeh said in a telephone interview from New Haven. ''This bothers the mullahs. Mohammed was to have been the last prophet: after that the books were closed. To the mullahs, any renegade from Islam deserves the death penalty.'' Professor Kazemzadeh said that there had been 90 documented executions in the last 18 months, ''80 of them from the Bahai leadership.'' At least 10,000 Bahais have fled Iran, he said, adding that about 1,000 others are homeless after having been driven from residences and businesses. ''Bahais are losing pensions, jobs, places in the army, employment in state industries like oil or the airlines,'' Professor Kazemzadeh said. ''Genocide does not have to be just killing people.'' American Bahais have photographs of destruction to Bahai places of worship, including the most sacred shrine, the House of Bab in Shiraz, where the first recognized prophet of the Bahais lived. That shrine was reportedly attacked by mobs, then razed completely on local government orders. According to the American Bahais, the total population of the Iranian Bahais has dropped from 500,000 before the revolution to a figure somewhere between 300,000 and 400,000 today."
