"When tackled on the issue of Egypt's emergent democracy, the authorities here liken themselves to physicians, prescribing freedoms by the shot. This week, Egyptians got an overdose, and on television, too. It happened like this. In a televised debate in Parliament on Monday night, an opposition legislator did not like what a minister was saying so he lunged for him. The minister did not like being lunged at, so he made to strike back. Bodyguards intervened. A melee ensued. Coverage came to an abrupt halt. Freedom of expression prevailed in the retelling and embroidering of the story in the next day's newspapers. But the episode brought other ills to the surface - torture and tapped phones and financial malfeasance, all subjects of the parliamentary debate - in a land confronting the strains of faith and modernity. Egypt is the region's most populous land, and, by its own self-perception, a leader of nations and barometer of contradictory sentiment. Here, Egyptian officials will say, the slow turning of reluctant Arab thought toward at least implicit recognition of Israel took root with peace between Cairo and Jerusalem a decade ago. Response to Complex Times And here, too, on a different scale, the region's reflexive response to complex times is played out on a stage contested by themes writ large: fundamentalism and secularism, repression and freedom, recession and corruption. In Parliament on Monday night, they coalesced around the uncompromising figure of Zaki Badr, the 61-year-old Interior Minister known mostly for the toughness with which he applies the Emergency Law that has been a prime weapon against perceived subversion and dissent for most of the last 40 years. The minister, a Western diplomat said recently, plays a role familiar to aficionados of police detective movies. ''There's the nice guy and the tough guy in the interrogation room,'' the diplomat said, requesting anonymity, ''Zaki Badr is definitely the tough guy.'' In democratic style, Mr. Badr had been called to answer opposition charges of police torture, misuse of the Emergency Law and corruption. In his own way, he did so by producing a cassette tape of a tapped telephone conversation between an opposition legislator and a money-changer, implying that the politician was trading currency on the black market, and an editor's videotaped confession that the opposition Wafd newspaper rigged photographs to show bogus evidence of torture. That was when the enraged Talaat Raslan, a member of the opposition Wafd party, made his pugilistic move, grabbing the minister by his lapels to drag him from the rostrum. Across the city Monday night, folks queued and pushed to buy the Wafd's newspaper for a printed replay of the bout, the talk of Cairo's coffeeshops. Evidence of Stirrings The fact that Mr. Badr was called to task at all was depicted by some as evidence of the limited democratic stirrings encouraged by President Hosni Mubarak since he took power after the 1981 assassination of President Anwar el-Sadat. ''Compared to many of our countries,'' an Arab diplomat said, ''Egypt has played the democratic card.'' The opposition parties challenged the fairness of the last parliamentary elections in 1987, which gave Mr. Mubarak's National Democratic Party a reduced but overwhelming majority of 358 seats in the 458-member parliament. The other seats are held by opposition parties, including the Muslim Brotherhood, technically outlawed but permitted to campaign under the incongruous banner of the Socialist Labor Party. The votes were counted by Mr. Badr's ministry. ''It is generally agreed,'' said a recent United States Congressional report on human rights in Egypt, ''that political liberties generally have been extended during Mubarak's Administration to the widest degree since the resolution'' against the monarchy in 1952. It added, however, that ''the right of Egyptian citizens to change their government through democratic processes remains limited.'' Some Egyptian analysts, moreover, depict the trend as the coming thrust of Arab politics. But those stirrings are offset by the reflex of repression through pervasive security forces that marks many Arab regimes and their response to religious and other opposition. In Egypt, the main agency countering the Government's domestic adversaries is the General Directorate for State Security Investigations, which reports to Mr. Badr. He is a figure, thus, who inspires awe in many. #1988 a Mixed Year According to the American report, 1988 was a mixed year. The number of Emergency Law detainees held without due process fell from between 2,000 and 3,000 to around 900. Darker visions intruded, too. ''Torture and other forms of mistreatment are forbidden by the Constitution and the law,'' the report said, ''but there are credible reports that it continues to be practiced by police and security officials, and punishment of such actions is very rare.'' Amnesty International has published similar conclusions. Elsewhere, the American report notes that Egypt's security services ''engage in surveillance of opposition politicians, political or social activists, foreign diplomats and suspected subversives on a routine basis.'' The principal target of Mr. Badr's attention, by most accounts, has been the small and secretive underground networks of Egypt's Islamic fundamentalists, one of which plotted and executed President Sadat's assassination. A Wave of Crackdowns Last year, in a wave of crack-downs, Mr. Badr ordered the arrest of hundreds of suspected fundamentalists after street-fighting centered in the Ein Shams district of Cairo. A police official said the move ''purged the area of elements who were sowing terror in the name of Islam.'' At the same time, with the compromise and caution by which the authorities seek to avoid trouble here, Mr. Mubarak has sought to embrace nonviolent advocates of Islamic law, like the Muslim Brotherhood. He has succeeded, too, in securing a voice of mainstream Islam in his favor. ''Islam is the religion of dialogue and not of violence,'' Sheik Mohammed Metwali el Sharawi, a leading and popular theologian, said in a widely seen television address in which he inveighed against ''young people who wish to fight sin and impose virtue by violence.''"
