"An attempt to send a United Nations team into Iran for an investigation of the human rights situation there collapsed today in a dispute over the wording of a General Assembly resolution criticizing the Teheran Government's record. Last week, Iran unexpectedly offered to allow the United Nations Human Rights Commission to send a representative into the country for the first time to investigate charges of rights abuses and reports that the authorities had executed hundreds of political opponents last summer. But in return, Iran demanded that the General Assembly drop a resolution it has adopted every year since 1984 accusing it of systematic human rights violations, including mass executions, torture and persecution of members of the Bahai religion. Iran wanted the assembly to agree unanimously on a softer text that would merely welcome Teheran's decision to cooperate with the Human Rights Commission investigation and instruct the commission's representative to visit Iran and prepare a report for next year's commission meeting. But the group of countries sponsoring the orignal resolution, most of them Western nations, refused to go as far as Iran wanted, and the negotiations collapsed today. The group comprises Australia, Austria, Belgium, Britain, Canada, Costa Rica, Denmark, Iceland, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal and Western Samoa. Assembly Approval Seen The General Assembly committee that deals with humanitarian and cultural issues then voted 55 to 23 tonight to adopt the original resolution, expressing concern over Iran's human rights record. There were 38 abstentions. The resolution appears certain to be approved by the full assembly next month, diplomats said. Last year, the same committee adopted a similar resolution by a slightly wider margin. Iran's chief delegate, Mohammed Mahallati, accused the countries sponsoring the resolution of prejudice against his Government. He said that by approving it, the assembly panel had put ''obstacles in the way of Iranian cooperation with the special representative.'' Such obstacles would need to be cleared before the human rights representative could visit Iran, he added. Advocates of the condemnation said they could not accept Iran's proposal on principle: Iran is the only country that has refused to coopperate with a United Nations Human Rights Commission investigation. Other countries with dubious human rights records, including Afghanistan, Chile and Cuba, have admitted United Nations investigators. However, the General Assembly still criticized their records until delegates were convinced of compliance with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights. Iran could not be given exceptional treatment, these countries argued. The sponsoring nations had offered to tone down the resolution to an extent. But they insisted it record that the commission's investigator had already found enough evidence of rights violations ''to justify international concern.'' They also insisted on a letter from Iran promising to admit the investigator and added that even a toned-down resolution must mention international concern over the fate of the Bahai."
