"Secretary of State George P. Shultz will register United States concern about charges that Iraq is using chemical weapons against the Kurds when he meets in Washington with a high Iraqi official Thursday, the State Department said today. Mr. Shultz will raise the subject in a meeting with Saadun Hamadi, Iraq's Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, whose post is something like that of a junior foreign minister. He will discuss it in the broad context of American humanitarian concern over the Iraqis' treatment of their Kurdish citizens, according to the chief State Department spokesman, Charles E. Redman. The expressions of increasing American unhappiness over the Iraqi military offensive against the Kurds came as Amnesty International, the London-based human rights organization, made an unparalleled direct appeal to the United Nations Security Council today to act immediately to stop what it called the massacre of Kurdish civilians by Iraqi forces. Mr. Redman said, ''The issues that we have been concerned about include not only chemical weapons but this question of human rights, as we see it developing in this particular situation.'' Asked whether Mr. Shultz would raise the issue of chemical weapons with Mr. Hamadi and ask him point-blank whether Iraq is using gas against Kurdish refugees, Mr. Redman replied, ''All of these kind of things will be on the agenda.'' Another State Department official said: ''The approach we want to take is that, 'We want to have a good relationship with you, but that this sort of thing makes it very difficult.' '' The United States still has no conclusive proof that Iraq has renewed its use of chemical weapons in the offensive against the Kurds, although many State Department and Pentagon officials say they are convinced that the Iraqis are using gases as part of an effort to crush the 40-year-old Kurdish insurgency once and for all. The issue is extremely sensitive because the Reagan Administration has moved closer to Iraq in recent years and because Vice President Bush, who presented a proposed American treaty banning the production and possession of chemical weapons in 1984, has tried to draw attention to the growing problem of chemical weapons. Last weekend, Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, denied that his country's military forces are using chemical weapons against the Kurds. Iraq considers Kurdish guerrilla leaders to be traitors and terrorists, because their rebellion was armed and financed by Iran at various stages since the Persian Gulf war broke out in 1980. But Iraq's widespread use of both mustard and nerve gas against the Kurdish village of Halabja earlier this year, in which as many as 2,000 people died in the attacks, has made the United States and other Western governments particularly sensitive to accusations about the use of chemical weapons in violation of the Geneva Protocol of 1925. A Lack of Certainty ''Everybody thinks they used chemical weapons, but we haven't seen proof positive,'' a State Department official said. ''Given the sensitivity of the issue, we want to make absolutely sure before we pass judgment.'' On Saturday, the American Ambassador to Iraq, April Glaspie, delivered a formal protest from the State Department to a senior Iraqi Foreign Ministry official over the recent offensive. The note expressed concern about allegations that Iraq had used gas, but it received no response, State Department officials said. Senior officials in the Turkish Foreign Ministry have told American diplomats that they are unable to say authoritatively that chemical weapons have been used, although some State Department aides said that the Turkish Foreign Ministry did not have representatives at the border and would not be well informed on the matter. In addition, because both mustard gas and nerve gas disperse very quickly, it is difficult to prove gas use from satellite photos. Since 1984, when it first started using chemical weapons, Iraq has deployed mustard gas or hyperite, which burns and blisters the skin and blackens the flesh on contact, especially on parts of the body that are moist. The gas has a similar effect on the lungs if it is inhaled and can cause death. Turkish press reports indicate that Iraqis were sealing off the border with a barrier of mustard gas. To a lesser extent, Iraq has used Tabun, a World War II nerve gas developed by the Germans that causes convulsions, foaming and bleeding at the mouth, and often death. In addition, photos from Halabja show the bodies of people believed to have been subjected to gas attacks with bluish faces, a symptom associated with cyanide gas that deprives the blood of oxygen and can cause death. Although Iraq has been the primary user of chemical weapons, Western intelligence sources say there is some evidence that Iran may have been responsible for the use of what appeared to be cyanide gas in the Halabja area. Last weekend, the United States Embassy in Ankara received permission from the Turkish Foreign Ministry to send a diplomat to the Iraqi border, where 100,000 Kurdish refugees have fled since Iraq began the offensive last month. The diplomat will try to determine first-hand whether Kurds have been victims of gas attacks. In its appeal, Amnesty International charged that the mass killings are part of a ''systematic and deliberate policy by the Iraqi Government to eliminate large numbers of Kurds'' as punishment for their political sympathies and in retaliation for the activities of opposition Kurdish forces. ''These killings represent a most serious denial of the purposes of the United Nations Charter and a flagrant contravention of fundamental international human rights norms,'' Amnesty International said."
