"The idea behind the Peres approach to peace with the Palestinians was to subcontract the dirty business of suppressing Arab terrorism to Yasir Arafat's Palestinian Authority. The Israeli gamble was that Arafat, unencumbered by human rights monitors and given money and a free hand to establish internal discipline, could take full charge of security within a de facto Palestinian state. That gamble is lost. Israeli civilian casualties since the recent Hamas onslaught began far outnumber those killed and injured during the long intifada. Sources in Israel tell me that the names and whereabouts of many of the ringleaders who recruited, indoctrinated, supplied and directed the suicide bombers were supplied to Arafat by the Government of Israel; instead of fulfilling the terms of the subcontract, the Palestinian leader is believed to have sent word to them to escape by sea to avert apprehension. No useful purpose is served by railing at Prime Minister Peres for gambling on the strength of will of Arafat, a canny survivor; nor should we berate the Palestinian for not being the ruthless strongman it was never in his character to be. Nor should we waste breath speculating about the formation of a coalition government in Israel as an excuse to delay elections. That won't happen. Mr. Peres, who moved the election date sooner to capitalize on the revulsion after the Rabin assassination, cannot now push it back to avoid the anger directed at him for gambling on the feckless Arafat. The voting field is level and May's election should proceed as scheduled. Israelis and their American supporters should not treat that election as a referendum on stopping or continuing the peace ""process."" Continuation is a must; the issues are how, and toward what final settlement. Labor's way is to ""declare war on Hamas,"" arresting hundreds of suspects, temporarily isolating the West Bank and Gaza and sealing the homes of the families of bombers. It seems uncertain about sending search parties into the cities turned over to Palestinian control lest that weaken Arafat. Peres will continue to deny having ""formal"" talks about the division of Jerusalem, but Oslo-type negotiations will proceed as soon as fury over the bombing subsides. Likud rejects Peres's declarations about Hamas as ""too little and too late."" It advocates complete closure of areas of terrorist infrastructure until security measures are in place; greater freedom of action by Israeli antiterrorism units throughout the West Bank and Gaza; heavier punishment, including expulsions, and demolition of terrorist families' homes. It urges suspension of international aid to Arafat until he breaks the back of Hamas terror, which it doubts he will ever do. But that invites denunciation as ""brutalizing."" Even assuming that the ""Netanyahu Doctrine"" of antiterrorism can be generally effective if not foolproof, what hope does that offer for living side by side in peace? ""We can have peace,"" says Benjamin Netanyahu, the Likud leader, reached by cellular telephone in his car in an Israeli traffic jam, ""when we address the reality of who controls security. We have no interest in occupying Arab cities and towns. We want Palestinians to run their own lives and choose their leaders, so long as we have the right to enter to protect the security of our citizens. We're not going to give up on peacemaking."" Just because the subcontracting of security has demonstrably failed is no reason to stop processing peace. A fresh approach that begins with Israeli leadership in sophisticated antiterrorism techniques, with American intelligence cooperation, moving toward Palestinian participation, might work. Grimly determined governments can succeed in curbing terror. What has worked for airplanes can work for buses. A new category of sovereignty in Gaza and West Bank enclaves that shares responsibility for security while providing the pride of passports is not beyond the wit of creative diplomats. The Palestinians just could not get it together yet. (Neither can the Kurds or the Irish; it's hard.) The anguish caused by the failure of subcontracting security calls for a realistic new tack, not despair and abandonment of the enterprise."
