"Turkey lags behind only Israel and Egypt in receipt of American military aid. Washington has approved $7.8 billion in military sales to Turkey in the last decade -- and has provided grants or loans to cover most of it. This year, unless dramatic events take place in the current House-Senate conference, Turkey will get $320 million in American credits to finish production -- in Turkey -- of F-16 fighter planes. America has traditionally used such aid to maintain its friendship with a strategically crucial ally. But the aid is now being used to prolong a war that both destabilizes Turkey and betrays American values. The State Department has acknowledged that Turkey is using the F-16's and other American weapons to strafe Turkish villages in its war against a Kurdish guerrilla group, killing thousands of civilians and leaving millions homeless. Washington should end the sale of weapons used in the war, and condition further military aid and sales on Turkish respect for human rights. One-fifth of Turks are Kurdish, a minority so repressed that its members are even forbidden to speak Kurdish in many public settings. In 1984 the Marxist Kurdish Workers' Party, or P.K.K., began a brutal civil war, killing many civilian officials and Kurdish opponents. The Turkish Government responded with an even more brutal campaign to bomb and burn Kurdish villages. It has prosecuted even peaceful Kurdish politicians, writers and human rights workers whose only crime was describing the human rights violations. An American reporter for Reuters, Aliza Marcus, may be sentenced to three years in jail for her reporting from Kurdish areas. The P.K.K. is weak, but the Government has made little progress toward winning the war. Polls show that Turks overwhelmingly favor a political settlement. Turkey's human rights record has caused several European countries to cut off military relationships -- although Germany just resumed aid -- and has so far denied Turkey coveted membership in the European Union. But the White House has allowed Turkish troops to pursue the P.K.K. into Kurdish areas of Iraq that America protects against Saddam Hussein. The Turkish incursions have killed many civilian Kurds. Since the Turks' war against the P.K.K. escalated in 1992, American military aid to Turkey has escalated as well. Washington now provides 85 percent of Turkey's arms imports and 90 percent of its military aid. Despite the efforts of Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, and Representative John Edward Porter, an Illinois Republican, to curtail aid, Congress has not yet managed to block or place conditions on substantial amounts of Turkish military aid. Turkey has escaped a cutback because of its strategic importance. America depends on military bases in Turkey, and wants Turkey to spread its moderate brand of Islam to Central Asia and its pro-Western views to the Balkans and the Mideast. The Turkish Government and the Clinton Administration argue that any cuts in arms transfers would weaken and radicalize Turkey. But the war itself poses a greater threat to Turkey's stability and prosperity. Its Islamic party, a relatively moderate one, gained support after a ban on Kurdish parties left it as the only non-mainstream alternative. Any further aid should carry human rights conditions that would promote a political solution to a war that has undermined Turkish democracy, boosted the power of the military, drained the economy and divided Turkey from its European allies. Placing such conditions on assistance would also reduce America's complicity in Turkey's repressive internal war."
