"The Palestinian police detained a prominent human rights lawyer in Gaza today after he criticized a decision by Yasir Arafat to set up a military court to try people suspected of security offenses. The lawyer, Raji Sourani, was held for about 16 hours, questioned, and then released. Mr. Sourani is the director of the Gaza Center for Rights and Law, an affiliate of the International Commission of Jurists in Geneva. The center has been critical of the human rights record of the Palestinian Authority, which Mr. Arafat heads. On Sunday, it called Mr. Arafat's order to set up a military court ""the most serious violation of human rights"" since the start of Palestinian self-rule last May and warned that it could lead to ""the militarization of Palestinian society."" Police officers arrived at Mr. Sourani's home at midnight and ordered him to go to their headquarters to answer questions about the statement, said Bernard Harborne, a staff member at the center. A spokesman for Mr. Arafat, who is also chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, confirmed the arrest, but gave no explanation. Under pressure from Israel to prosecute militants suspected of involvement in anti-Israeli attacks, Mr. Arafat issued an order on Feb. 7 establishing a ""State Security Court,"" headed by a military judge. Palestinian efforts to curb violence by militants will be discussed at a meeting scheduled for Thursday between Mr. Arafat and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel. The center had said that setting up a military tribunal ""appears to undermine the basis of democracy, the independence of the judiciary and the separation of powers between arms of government."" It warned that the new tribunal might consider evidence that was unacceptable in civil courts and sanction excessive arrests and interrogation. Earlier this month, the center criticized a sweep by the Palestinian Authority that arrested suspected militants, asserting that the authority was jailing people for their political beliefs, not for suspected crimes.  Suspected Bomber Is Arrested GAZA, Feb. 15 (Reuters) -- The Palestinian authority in the Gaza Strip arrested a member of Hamas, the militant Islamic group, who was planning a suicide bombing in Israel, a senior Palestinian security official said today. The official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that the man arrested was 31-year-old Adel Khzeik, a construction worker and member of the Islamic Resistance Movement, known as Hamas. The official said Mr. Khzeik had planned the bombing with two other men who had yet to be detained. Israel imposed a ban on Palestinians entering Israel after two Islamic Holy War suicide bombers from Gaza killed 21 Israelis near Tel Aviv on Jan. 22. Since the peace accord was signed in September 1993, 59 Israelis have been killed by bombers.  Israel Frees 2 Arab-Americans JERUSALEM, Feb. 15 (AP) -- Two Palestinian-Americans arrested by Israel on suspicion of funneling money from Chicago's Muslims to a militant Islamic group have been released with no charges, one of the men said today. The two men, who between them were carrying $154,000 in checks and cash, were detained upon entering Israel."
