"The cost of Iraq's stalemated war with Iran and a worldwide decline in oil prices have depressed the boom economy here and turned Iraq into a debtor nation living on deferred payment of its import bills, buying food on credit and reducing foreign purchases, except for arms, to a minimum. The standard of living is declining. Nonetheless, in a volatile region and a country prone to leadership succession by coup, President Saddam Hussein's Government is considered firm in power, with no known contenders for power in sight. Diplomats here say the reason for such stability in adversity lies partly in the President's charisma and his leadership qualities. But in even greater measure, many attribute Mr. Hussein's survival as President to his ruthless use of power. Mr. Hussein exercises ''near-absolute power'' and ''rules by decree,'' the State Department said in its human- rights report to Congress for 1983. A Remarkably Negative Picture The report presents a remarkably negative human-rights picture, although a diplomat said it was softened from an even more critical draft. It declares: ''Activities which the state considers threats to its security can lead to detention without charges, severe prison sentences, mistreatment, torture or summary execution.'' The assertions were confirmed by representatives of most Western and some non-Western diplomatic missions here in three weeks of interviews. But they could not be tested with Iraqi sources because Iraqi officials declined requests for interviews and nonofficial Iraqis shun conversations with foreigners in an atmosphere of a pervasive secret-police presence. Diplomats are unanimous in declaring their inability to meet Iraqis. ''Some leave here after three years without knowing a single Iraqi,'' said a representative of a neutral European country. Official business, diplomats said, is conducted in the minimum of time, with a minimum of preliminary chitchat and usually in the presence of more than one Iraqi functionary. Even nationals of Asian countries that consider themselves nonaligned, who staff the large international hotels built in the boom years, reported that they were unable to make Iraqi friends because of the suspicion that attaches to all contacts with foreigners. A Claustrophobic Feeling The hotel lobbies are occupied day and night with idle men filling most available seats, playing with worry beads and keeping an eye on the guests, particularly when the guests meet what in most cases are their Iraqi business contacts. This enhances the claustrophobic feeling to which most foreign residents confess. Their sense of isolation is not diminished by the fact that Iraq admits no foreign publications. Whatever the degree of surveillance of aliens, it is far surpassed by the controls that the regime imposes on its own people, according to diplomats and other foreigners working here. ''There is a feeling that at least 3 million Iraqis are watching the 11 million others,'' a European diplomat said.  The State Department report said ''a large and feared internal security police force and the intelligence services'' were responsible for the repressive measures that the document detailed. The security agencies permeate society to a degree that ''no one ever knows who's who,'' said an Arab specialist in a Western embassy. Mr. Hussein, who is on record as believing that the ruling Arab Baath Socialist Party had erred in not being ruthless enough after seizing power in 1963, dispelled any doubt about his own firmness by having tried and executed 21 of his closest political associates shortly after becoming President. ''Summary execution may be carried out because of suspected opposition to the Baath, for factional reasons or as punishment for poor performance in military operations,'' the State Department reported. In 1982, Health Minister Riyadh Ibrahim Hussein was executed as a ''traitor'' after the President accused him of importing medicines ''that killed people.'' Diplomats said his body was sent to his family with instructions that they were to make no show of mourning. A Request for Particulars Last October, Amnesty International asked the Iraqi Government for particulars on 520 people who the organization thinks were executed since 1978. Total political executions are believed to run much higher. Diplomats here say 600 Shiite Moslem activists have probably been executed on suspicion of pro-Iranian sympathies since the war began. Diplomats said disappearances of people on political grounds were common. ''Family members rarely know where, why or even if relatives are being held,'' the State Department reported. ''It is difficult to ascertain whether an execution has occurred, or whether a person may have died under torture or is still incarcerated.'' Torture and at least temporary disappearance are not limited to Iraqis. Robert Spurling, an American who worked for a French-operated hotel here, was arrested last June as he and his family were about to leave on vacation. It was not until August that his arrest was disclosed to the United States, and he was not released until October. In the intervening months, Mr. Spurling has said, he was subjected to electric-shock torture; vicious beatings, with weighted fists and with wooden bludgeons, as well as on the soles of his feet; crushing of his toes and tearing out of toenails, solitary confinement and a starvation diet. The aim was to get Mr. Spurling to confess to espionage, which he denied."
