"To the Editor: While we are inclined to agree with James Reston's assertion that S ecretary Haig's press conference tirades when he failed to c onsolidate concrete support from Western Europe against Soviet i nfluence in the Polish crackdown were mostly for show (''Haig's V erbal Success,'' column Jan. 13), we wonder how successful his verbal excesses were outside the domestic American market. In particular, we fear that many Europeans cringed with us at Haig's lashing out against the British journalist who challenged him on the double standard of condemning Polish martial law while at the same time aiding the Turkish military (news story Jan. 13). To be kind, his answer was less than convincing. The issue, however, is very real, and considerably more important than the ''silly analogy'' which Reston makes it out to be. Turkey has been under martial law for the last three years, and it has been more than a year since the army physically took over. The suggestion that the Sept. 12, 1980, coup was justified in view of the political disorder then reigning in Turkey is not qualitatively very different from the Soviet apologists' view that the military takeover in Poland was unavoidable in view of the actions of the ''extremists'' in Solidarity. The fact of the matter is, nevertheless, that Turkish political and human rights have been brutally trampled by General Evren's junta, whose recent limp promise of a return to democracy is in sharp contrast to the harsh measures passed by it over the last months. The pashas in Ankara do not stand for ''the precious freedoms and values'' which Secretary Haig claims to uphold. Turkey's liberal constitution is being replaced by a cut-to-order code of repression, political parties have been dissolved, the autonomy of universities suspended and union activities banned. Female students have been forbidden to wear scarves, in spite of their religious beliefs, the persecution of homosexuals has reached unprecedented levels, while torture of political prisoners is rampant. Yet, while the United States posits the resumption of union activity as a prerequisite of aid to Poland, it turns a deaf ear to the 52 death sentences requested by the military prosecutor in a trial of labor leaders in Turkey. Instead, it is increasing its aid from $547 million to $703 million. Unfortunately for the makers of foreign policy in Washington, West Eu ropeans are aware of the brutal repression in Turkey. Hence, in stead of consolidating behind Secretary Haig's ''eruption,'' his '' eruption'' may well reinforce his reputation as ''the mad bomber.'' RICHARD FALK ADAMANTIA POLLIS, STUART SCHAAR SONIA KRUKS, STANLEY DIAMOND, New York, Jan. 28, 1982. The writers are professors in the social sciences."
