"A Palestinian human rights advocate who was jailed after he was quoted as criticizing Yasir Arafat's self-rule administration said today that he planned to continue speaking out. Dr. Eyad R. Sarraj, a psychiatrist who is the leader of the Palestinian Independent Commission for Citizens Rights, was released Sunday night after spending nine days in a Gaza City jail. The Palestinian Attorney General, Khaled Kidreh, said that Dr. Sarraj's release was ordered by Mr. Arafat, and that Dr. Sarraj could still be tried on charges of libel, incitement, and harming the public interest. ""The file is not closed,"" Mr. Kidreh said today. Dr. Sarraj said that Mr. Arafat's administration had a poor human rights record, ""and I will keep up my criticisms."" ""Torture is still going on,"" he said. ""People are still intimidated. There is a terrible mixing between legal and executive authorities."" He went on: ""Everybody knows that there is mishandling of authority, there is confusion and there are no respect to laws. Unfortunately, only very few can speak out."" Dr. Sarraj was arrested on May 18 after he was quoted as calling the Palestinian Authority ""corrupt, dictatorial and oppressive"" in a May 6 column by Anthony Lewis on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times. He also had been quoted as saying that the Palestinian Authority made arbitrary arrests and tortured suspects. He also said he was ""100 times freer"" during Israel's occupation of Gaza to speak out in the local press. That remark, in particular, seemingly rankled Palestinian officials. ""We revere freedom of opinion, but he has gone beyond that,"" Mr. Kidreh said. Dr. Sarraj's jailing provoked an outcry from local and international human rights groups, which he credited for his release. ""My detention hurt the Palestinian Authority,"" he said. Several days before his release, Dr. Sarraj wrote a letter to Mr. Arafat in which he said he had not attacked Mr. Arafat or any figure in the Palestinian Authority, but gave only ""constructive criticism"" of the government. ""I said I was sorry if my criticism had caused personal pain to the president,"" Dr. Sarraj said today. ""This does not mean I am abandoning my previous positions and my principles against any violations of human rights."" Dr. Sarraj said the police made him sign a document promising to respect Palestinian laws, but he added a clause in his own handwriting that he has the right to express his opinions to the news media. Dr. Sarraj said he had been asked to come to the police station on May 18 ""to have a cup of coffee"" with the commander. Once there, the commander and Mr. Kidreh accused him of libeling the Palestinian Authority in The New York Times article, he said. He said he was confined by himself in a jail cell but was never interrogated. He appeared on May 23 in a military court, which extended his detention for 15 days. His lawyer was not told about the court hearing and he was allowed no other representation."
