"The United Nations Security Council overwhelmingly approved a resolution today laying the groundwork for a seizure of impounded Iraqi assets. The latest resolution, intended to increase pressure on Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, warned that if the Iraqis continued to disregard Council demands, the world organization would take ""further measures under the Charter."" This could include the use of military force, but this was not explicitly mentioned. [Text, page A12.] The new resolution declares Iraq responsible for all damage and personal injuries resulting from its occupation of Kuwait and asks nations to prepare claims for financial compensation and submit evidence of human rights violations by Iraqi forces there. Yemen and Cuba Abstain The final vote showed 13 members in favor, while Yemen, the Council's only Arab member, and Cuba abstained. The vote was postponed from last Saturday while President Mikhail S. Gorbachev of the Soviet Union sent a high-level envoy on another mission to Baghdad. By voting for the resolution, the Soviet Union indicated that the trip to Baghdad by Mr. Gorbachev's envoy, Yevgeny M. Primakov, did not produce the kind of breakthrough that could forestall further Council action. Mr. Primakov said in answer to a question upon leaving Baghdad that his trip had been disappointing. But Mr. Gorbachev in Paris still held out the possibility that President Saddam Hussein might yield to the United Nations demands. He said he had received fresh information from Mr. Primakov suggesting that ""Iraq's leadership might at last heed the voice of the United Nations."" New U.S. Warnings While Mr. Gorbachev continued to urge a diplomatic solution, primarily through Arab nations, the Bush Administration stepped up its warnings that military power might be used to force Iraq out of Kuwait if nothing else works. In a speech in Los Angeles, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d explicitly said that the use of military power was one option to pursue in getting Iraq to leave Kuwait. ""We will not rule out a possible use of force if Iraq continues to occupy Kuwait,"" Mr. Baker said. At the United Nations Arab diplomats said President Hussein appears to be seriously worried by the danger of an American-led attack on his forces in Kuwait and Iraq. They said Mr. Hussein sent a message over the weekend to Mr. Gorbachev and President Francois Mitterrand of France in advance of their talks in Paris today, offering to release all the foreign hostages held by Iraq if those two leaders committed themselves to a political solution. But the Gorbachev-Mitterrand meeting ended without such a joint statement. Yemen's Foreign Minister, Abdel-Karim al-Iryani, said in Sana, his nation's capital, today that he had learned of this Iraqi offer in a phone conversation with Iraq's Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz. The resolution approved by the Security Council today also requires Iraq to cease looting and hostage-taking in Kuwait and resupply the foreign embassies still holding out there. Only the United States and Britain have operating embassies in Kuwait. France ordered its remaining diplomats home today. The resolution asked the Secretary General of the United Nations to try once more to find a peaceful way out of the crisis. But it warned that if Baghdad continues to reject its demands, the Council will take further unspecified ""measures under the Charter"" to enforce them. Options Available to U.N. These could include tightening the trade embargo it has imposed, although the Council is reluctant to cut telecommunications links or break off diplomatic relations, the only remaining nonmilitary steps provided for by the Charter. Thomas R. Pickering, the United States representative to the United Nations, hinted that the Council might soon consider paying compensation to victims of Iraq's aggression out of the country's assets frozen overseas. But the Council might also threaten to oust Iraq from Kuwait by force, as the Charter allows if it decides that economic sanctions are not effective. The five big powers with permanent Council seats sought to reinforce this implicit threat of force today by convening the Security Council's military advisory body at the highest level in United Nations history. For the first time the United States sent a three-star general from Washington to represent the Joint Chiefs of Staff at a meeting of the Security Council's Military Staff Committee, called to review the situation in the Persian Gulf and the efforts there to enforce the trade embargo against Iraq. Soviet and Chinese Generals Lieut. Gen. Michael Carns, Director of the Joint Staff at the Pentagon, was joined by Col. Gen. Bronislav A. Omelichev, First Deputy Chief of the Soviet General Staff, who came from Moscow for the talks and by Vice Adm. Alain Coatanea, a senior French naval officer from Paris. China was represented by Maj. Gen. Du Guanyi, the head of its delegation to the committee, and Britain by Maj. Gen. Edwin H. A. Beckett, head of the British Defense Staff in Washington. Several delegates addressed the Council in terms that suggested that a decision to use force might not be far away. Mr. Pickering, after emphasizing that every government has a duty to protect its citizens held hostage by Iraq, said, ""The United States will do that which is necessary to meet its obligations for its own citizens."" Canada's representative, Yves Fortier, said the Council ""must not shy away"" from enforcing its decisions. And Malaysia's representative, Ismail Razali, said, ""The Council's ability to undertake futher enforcement measures should not be doubted."" Iraq's representative, Abdul Amir al-Anbari, made an hourlong speech in which he gave a preview of some of the difficulties the Council may face later this week by asking why it punished Iraq for occupying Kuwait but not Israel for occupying East Jerusalem, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip."
