"Halit Gungen had written the kind of scoop that plays well in this southeastern city, which regards itself as the capital of Turkey's large and restive Kurdish minority. In an anti-Government weekly magazine, he wrote of links between a shadowy Government security unit and an Islamic fundamentalist front whose members, he said, were trained by the authorities and used as death squads to assassinate Kurdish separatists. Two days after the magazine appeared in February, the journalist, himself a Kurd, answered a knock at his office door, his associates say.  Someone on the doorstep shot him dead with a bullet to the head. Six days later, Cengiz Altun, another Kurdish journalist, died of gunshot wounds in the southeastern city of Batman after writing about reported human rights abuses. They were not the first to die in unexplained and sinister circumstances. 62 Killings Since 1991 The killings, said Sabahattin Acar, a lawyer and secretary of Diyarbakir's human rights league, fit a pattern of political attacks that have taken 62 lives since the beginning of last year. They have raised new and troubling questions about Turkey's handling of a crisis that pits a Marxist Kurdish separatist group against the authorities in an increasingly violent guerrilla war. The conflict, diplomats in Ankara said, has assumed more significant proportions as new and ethnically oriented nation-states in the former Soviet Union and Yugoslavia fan Kurdish nationalist sentiment. And for the staunchly pro-Western authorities in Ankara, it restates a central riddle of Turkey's modern identity: How does the Government cope with an insurgency that seeks to dismember the country at the same time it seeks acceptance among Western European nations demanding human rights practices that have little resonance here? In this region, fringed by Iran, Iraq and Syria, even visiting parliamentary legislators carry handguns on their hips. 3,000 Killed in 8 Years For eight years, the Turkish authorities have been fighting a guerrilla war against the Kurdish Workers Party, and more than 3,300 people have died in a conflict that corrodes Turkey's Western-looking aspirations and raises frequent questions about human rights violations, including routine and systematic torture. Until last October, when Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel returned to power, the authorities largely relied on what proved to be an ineffective military response to the Kurdish guerrilla campaign, only reluctantly and belatedly shifting away from the notion that Turkish Kurds have no claim to a national identity. Until April last year, the Kurds' language was outlawed and it still may not be used to broadcast or teach; the Constitution specifically denies their claim to a separate political identity. When Mr. Demirel traveled here in December, however, he seemed to offer a different perspective. ""Turkey has recognized the Kurdish reality,"" he said. The comment, and earlier offers to treat the country's estimated 10 million Kurds ""with compassion,"" seemed part of an unfolding counterinsurgency strategy: an offer of benevolence toward Kurds who distance themselves from what the authorities call terrorism and a warning of harsh tactics toward those who do not. This strategy includes air strikes in March against what officials say are Kurdish bases in Iraq. The attacks drew accusations both from the United Nations Children's Fund and independent reporters that the Turkish airplanes had killed civilians, including children. Despite those protests, Turkish warplanes were later reported in action again against Kurdish guerrilla bases in northern Iraq. An official statement issued here said two tented camps about six miles inside Iraq ""have been destroyed."" What troubles Kurdish leaders here more directly, however, are deaths like that of Mr. Gungen, attributed to Government sponsorship of an ostensibly Islamic fundamentalist group called Hezbollah, or the Party of God. ""I believe that some security forces and the Government are supporting the Hezbollah against the people,"" said Dagistan Toprak, the Kurdish Deputy Mayor, who belongs to the Social Democratic Party, the junior coalition partner in Mr. Demirel's Government. ""Since the beginning of 1991, there have been a lot of mysterious killings,"" said Fevzi Veznerdaroglu, a human rights lawyer, who said he suspected a counterinsurgency unit within the Turkish military. Asking About Trials Although the authorities routinely deny involvement, Mr. Acar, the human rights official, said that none of the 62 apparently political killings had been investigated and that there had been no murder trials. ""The Government is not trying to find the killers,"" he said. ""It is not even taking evidence."" By contrast, he said, state security courts tried 1,200 people last year on charges on supporting the Kurdish guerrillas. The suspicions of Mr. Acar and others have been fueled by incidents in which people later found dead were last seen in the hands of the police or in police cars. The police deny involvement, but the killings have spread a profound apprehension. ""I'm scared,"" he said. ""I cannot go out at night. I can't open my door at night and I never go anywhere alone."" Guerrilla or Terrorist? In the clash of perceptions and propaganda between the two sides, Kurdish supporters of the guerrillas call them liberators, while the authorities label them bandits and terrorists. The authorities say there are 3,000 guerrillas inside Turkey and 7,000 more waiting either across the border with Iraq or at the organization's headquarters in the Syrian-controlled Bekaa region of Lebanon. ""The population of the southeast is deeply alienated, caught between the P.K.K. and the security forces and tilting towards the P.K.K.,"" a senior Western diplomat in Ankara said, referring to the Kurdish guerrilla group by its initials. Still, there seem to be strong indications of rising Kurdish nationalist sentiment, once so repressed that even the word ""Kurd"" was taboo and the authorities referred to them as ""mountain Turks."" ""Today we are valley Kurds,"" said Mr. Toprak, the Deputy Mayor. ""The Kurds have cross the threshold of fear and are no longer afraid."" Symbols and Resistance A group of parliamentary deputies touring southeastern Turkey in March entered one village where women produced P.K.K. banners and portraits of the party leader, Abdullah Ocalan, all illegal emblems in Turkey. And a celebration of International Women's Day at the offices here of the People's Labor Party, a group that has sent 20 elected deputies to the Ankara Parliament and is regarded by some as the guerrillas' lawful front inside Turkey, turned quickly into a demonstration on behalf of the Kurdish party. ""The P.K.K. is our party, Apo is our leader,"" one song went, referring to Mr. Ocalan by his nickname. People punched clenched-fist salutes into the air. ""Kurdish women are struggling alongside the men,"" proclaimed Husniye Olmez, a party official. ""We must join hands and resist together. If we do this, no power can stop us."" Paradoxically, the fiery pro-Kurdish speeches were mostly in Turkish because, Kurdish leaders said, the years of linguistic suppression have left few city-dwelling Kurds fluent in their own language. Nonetheless, such political boldness would have been unthinkable only a few years ago. Some Turks fear that Government concessions to Kurds, like permitting the publication of Kurdish newspapers and allowing Kurdish legislators to enter the 450-seat Parliament, have merely encouraged Kurdish support of the guerrillas. ""The way it was in Lithuania or Yugoslavia, it must be the same here,"" said Hatip Dicle, a Kurdish legislator, who created an uproar in Parliament last November when he protested the parliamentary oath as ""a denial of the Kurdish people."" ""The Kurdish people will decide their own future.""  Rebels Are Arrested ANKARA, Turkey, March 26 (AP) -- Continuing their crackdown on Kurdish rebels in the southeastern region near Iraq, Turkish soldiers and police officers arrested scores of Kurds as suspects today and military jets pounded rebel camps in northern Iraq, Government officials said. The officials said the rebels had been seized in house-to-house searches, including 65 in the city of Cizre and others in Silopi, also near the Iraqi border, and at Nusaybin on the border with Syria. The authorities have also imposed a curfew on the three cities. There were no reports of casualties from the air attack, the fifth such raid this month, which followed one on Wednesday. Although a military official would only say that an assault had taken place on Wednesday, the Turkish television said the planes had attacked a mountaintop base in northern Iraq that has been hit by the Turkish military since last year. Clashes between the authorities and Kurds have claimed at least 75 lives since Saturday. Map of Turkey showing location of Diyarbakir."
