"A United Nations report on human rights in Iran has come under fire from Western diplomats, Iranian exiles and other groups who say it does not adequately document the widespread torture and summary executions carried out by the regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. ''The report came as both a surprise and a disappointment,'' said a Western diplomat with considerable experience in the Middle East, including Iran. ''Is he talking about Iran or Switzerland?'' The report, prepared by Andres Aguilar, a former Minister of Justice of Venezuela and special representative of the United Nations Human Rights Commission, says widespread allegations of executions and torture ''cannot be dismissed as groundless.'' It also says available information ''appears to contradict'' an official Iranian declaration on human rights, especially regarding torture in prisons, arbitrary arrests, prolonged detentions without trial and denial of visits by lawyers and family members. The report also says Iranian authorities have not replied to Mr. Aguilar's requests to visit the country or for specific information about a list of 299 people who were ''allegedly summarily or arbitrarily executed or who allegedly died as a result of ill treatment during their detention.'' Assembly Debate Scheduled The report will be presented next week to the General Assembly for its first debate on this subject. Critics say the report fails to incorporate most of the documentation compiled by Iranian exile groups and religious and human rights organizations and makes no firm conclusions about human rights abuses. ''We're writing the history of human rights with our blood, and we feel deceived by this report,'' said Dr. Kazem Rajavi, a political scientist who represents the National Council of Resistance. The National Council of Resistance is an Iranian opposition movement affiliated with the Mujahedeen Khalq, a Moslem socialist party opposed to the Khomeini regime. Massoud Rajavi, Dr. Rajavi's brother, is head of the Mujahedeen Khalq. Dr. Rajavi said he presented hundreds of pages of documents to Mr. Aguilar that assert that Iran's revolutionary regime has executed more than 12,000 Mujahedeen members and sympathizers and tortured thousands more since it seized power in February 1979. He said he arranged for several torture victims to tell their stories to Mr. Aguilar in meetings in Geneva in July. The report was also criticized by Ruhiyyih Rabbani, an American who is the highest dignitary of the Bahai religion. ''The report is inadequate,'' she said. ''It doesn't go into enough detail, especially considering the documentation we provided to Mr. Aguilar.'' The Bahai International Community, which calls for the unity of all people, races and religions and equality of sexes, says it has recorded 300 executions of Bahais in Iran and widespread mistreatment and imprisonment of many of the 300,000 Bahais there. The most recent report on Iran by Amnesty International, the London-based human rights organizaton, criticized Iran for the torture of prisoners and executions. It also said some prisoners who were given only short prison sentences were executed instead, that relatives of political suspects were imprisoned as ''hostages'' and that members of a wide variety of political groups were executed. . Western diplomats said the United Nations report would have been stronger with the inclusion of official reports and statements from Iran, if only to portray the atmosphere of repression they said exists in Iran. Iranian religious leaders often speak of the necessity of physical punishment as a ''purification,'' for example, and Teheran's newspapers often report public floggings and secret trials. United Nations officials defended the report. ''The report may be weak or strong,'' said Dr. Kurt Herndl, Assistant Secretary General for Human Rights, ''but you will have for the first time a General Assembly debate on the issue.''"
