"The emerging ""new world order"" offers great promise. But it also threatens new waves of human dislocation, giving fresh urgency to old questions. Who is a refugee? How should nations and international organizations like the United Nations respond to their plight? Under international law, a refugee is someone with a well-founded fear of persecution at home. The number of refugees seeking asylum or already resettled is now 17.5 million, up from 12 million just three years ago. Many of those who do flee their homeland, however, are victims of crushing poverty, not political oppression. Under law, they are not entitled to asylum. The distinction between political refugees and economic migrants can cause great pain. One dramatic example is Britain's proposal to forcibly repatriate more than 50,000 Vietnamese who fled to Hong Kong and are classified as economic migrants. The first group of 59 were literally dragged onto a plane last week and sent back. But the distinction makes sense; even wealthy, developed countries can't absorb all who suffer economic deprivation. What sanctuary they can offer is best set aside for genuine victims of political oppression. For these refugees, two traditional responses have been asylum in a nearby country or resettlement in a more developed country. The concept of temporary safe haven offers a useful refinement. Some areas like Asia, for example, might formally begin to offer protection for a limited time to those who flee within the region, until safer conditions prevail at home. The newest challenge is presented not by those who flee but by those who can't. Helping this group is tricky. In the aftermath of the Persian Gulf war, the U.N. authorized an unprecedented humanitarian intervention to protect Kurds in Iraq from oppression by Saddam Hussein. This marked a break with the usual reluctance to violate national sovereignty. Many officials are now equally concerned about the fate of civil war victims in Yugoslavia. The General Assembly is debating a more formal mechanism to allow intervention to protect human rights and assist internal refugees. A deputy secretary general for humanitarian affairs has been proposed, as part of a likely administrative reorganization of the Secretariat. This plan raises the same delicate questions of sovereignty. The debate won't begin in earnest until the new Secretary General is selected. But whether a new position is established or the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees is given a larger mandate, some vehicle for non-forcible humanitarian intervention makes sense. There have never been easy answers to the plight of the world's refugees. But the world has responded before; it can do so again."
