"United Nations officials are looking into reports that as many as 2,000 fighters from the Islamic Taliban movement were killed and buried in mass graves after being taken prisoner in northern Afghanistan by forces of the coalition driven out of Kabul last year. The representative of the ousted Government of Burhanuddin Rabbani, which still holds Afghanistan's United Nations seat, was called in today by United Nations officials and asked for an explanation. The discovery of the graves was made public today in Afghanistan by Gen. Rashid Dostum, a warlord still fighting on the Rabbani side. The graves were found in Jozjan Province about 90 miles east of Mazar-i-Sharif, a northern stronghold of the former Government. In May, a fracture in the coalition forces led to a brief alliance between the Taliban and Gen. Malik Pahlawan, a rival of General Dostum. General Pahlawan soon broke with the Taliban forces and attacked them in Mazar-i-Sharif, where they were trapped. Many who were not killed were taken prisoner. ""The whole northern alliance is responsible for these killings,"" Abdul Hakeem Mujahid, the Taliban's representative-designate to the United Nations, said in an interview today. He blamed the United Nations, human rights groups and the news media for not listening when some prisoners escaped reached Kabul with stories of atrocities and executions of soldiers in groups, night after night. ""We are very, very sorry about the attitude of the United Nations and human rights organizations, because have repeatedly told them that our prisoners are being killed in Mazar-i-Sharif, and they didn't take notice. Mr. Mujahid said. ""Even in meetings with the State Department, I have spoken about the collective killing of our prisoners. ""If the hair of a person is being cut in Kabul, the whole media is talking about it,"" he added. ""But 2,000 people being killed, and there is no serious interest."" By contrast, he said, the Taliban had released several thousands of prisoners captured on their drive into the north, a region populated by Uzbeks, Tajiks and other ethnic groups traditionally at odds with the Pathans who form a majority of the Taliban. Relief agencies and United Nations mission staff in Afghanistan have not been able to work around Mazar-i-Sharif because of fighting and have no first-hand information on the graves, but officials say the story of prisoner massacres may well be true. Today Lakhdar Brahimi, a former Algerian Foreign Minister who is General Dostum's special representative for Afghanistan, and Kieran Prendergast, Under Secretary General for Political Affairs, asked the United Nations office in Kabul for an investigation into the reports of mass graves at the request of Secretary General Kofi Annan. ""The Secretary General asked that the mission in Afghanistan tell us what they know,"" Mr. Brahimi said in an interview. ""We don't want to jump to conclusions before we find out a little bit more. But we are certainly concerned."" Taliban Supporters say pro-Iranian groups fighting with the ousted coalition may have also been involved, with the aim of inflaming interethnic strife within Afghanistan. Taliban representatives were told here that General Dostum, who is not considered pro-Iranian and who may be attempting to discredit General Pahlawan, had not only disclosed the graves but also offered the use of an airfield to evacuate the bodies. Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about reports of killings of captive Taliban fighters in northern Afghanistan referred incorrectly to the superior of an international official in that country. The ""general"" cited, who is represented by Lakhdar Brahimi, a former Algerian Foreign Minister, is the Secretary General of the United Nations -- not Gen. Rashid Dostum, an Afghan warlord."
