"The arrest, detention and release of Eyad Sarraj, a prominent doctor and human rights advocate in Gaza, has done more than expose the growing antidemocratic tendencies of Yasir Arafat and the Palestinian Authority. It also demonstrates that the peace process begun in Oslo three years ago is fundamentally flawed. Dr. Sarraj is the leader of the Palestinian Independent Commission for Citizens' Rights, established by Mr. Arafat himself. It has a mandate to insure the protection of human rights in the areas of self-rule established by the Oslo accords. On June 9, Dr. Sarraj was arrested for the third time in six months for speaking out against human rights abuses under the Palestinian Authority. Falsely charged with narcotics possession and assault, he was beaten and tried before a military court. Finally, after 17 days of detention and an international outcry, Mr. Arafat released Dr. Sarraj, without offering an explanation or apology. The Sarraj affair has been an unqualified success in silencing domestic opposition. Arrest and mistreatment have become standard for those who dare criticize Mr. Arafat or the Oslo accords. In the past year, journalists and human rights workers like Raji Sourani of the Palestinian Center for Human Rights, Maher Alami of Al Quds newspaper and Bassem Eid of B'Tselem, an Israeli human rights group, have been arrested or detained. The climate of fear is now so pervasive that a BBC correspondent could not coax any prominent Palestinian to comment on the release of Dr. Sarraj. This repression is the result of a peace process that has allowed Mr. Arafat to consolidate his authoritarian rule in a shortsighted effort to insure Israel's security. Instead of forging a politics of national unity and reconciliation, like President Nelson Mandela has done in South Africa, Mr. Arafat has promoted midnight military courts, arbitrary arrest and torture, endemic corruption and unaccountable security forces. Israel has encouraged these repressive policies by pushing Mr. Arafat to crack down on internal dissent. It has criticized him for failing to control Islamic extremists, when in fact most of the suicide bombers lived in areas under Israeli control. Israel has also imposed a devastating blockade on the 2.5 million Palestinians living in Gaza and the West Bank for more than four months. The result: a steep decline in living standards and higher unemployment. (The rate is now more than 50 percent.) Why does anyone believe that peace and security can be won through political persecution and economic impoverishment? These policies will only deepen misery and despair in Gaza and the West Bank -- perfect conditions for political and religious extremism. Extremism is not just a Palestinian issue. The newly elected Prime Minister of Israel, Benjamin Netanyahu, has already in effect repudiated the peace process, vetoing a Palestinian state and promising to increase the number of Jewish settlers in Palestinian territories from 160,000 to 500,000. And two weeks ago, Israeli authorities prevented the elected Palestinian Council from meeting in Nablus. Palestinians support peace based on mutual respect and international law. But it is becoming increasingly difficult to find Palestinians in Gaza or the West Bank who support this peace process. Not even Mr. Arafat, once a symbol of our national inspirations, can impose this unjust situation on a people who have struggled so long for self-determination without ushering in a new cycle of violence. He should stop his repressive policies and reach out to all Palestinians to work to build a democratic state. For its part, Israel must lift the blockade and recognize that an enduring peace requires a independent and economically viable Palestinian state."
