"The Israeli Government today extended the authority of the secret services to use physical force on Palestinian suspects during interrogation, and specifically the authority to violently shake the detainees -- a technique that the Israeli Attorney General has banned. The decision by a ministerial commission followed an appeal to the Government from Amnesty International, the human rights organization, to ban torture or ill-treatment of prisoners. The organization charged in a statement that ""Palestinian detainees in Israel have been systematically subjected to methods of torture including hooding, shaking, beating, sleep deprivation while standing or sitting in painful positions and prolonged confinement in closet-sized cells."" But during a Government review of the police procedures, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin and Police Minister Moshe Shahal reportedly argued that shaking and other uses of ""moderate physical force"" were critical in the interrogation of people who might know of an imminent terror attack. The debate is an old one in Israel, and human rights groups have documented many cases of physical coercion against Palestinian detainees. In 1987, after years of complaints from human rights groups, the Government ordered an inquiry into the interrogation practices of the General Security Service, the secret security service known by its Hebrew initials as Shin Bet. One conclusion of the investigating commission was to propose that ""a moderate degree of physical pressure"" be permitted during interrogations. That authority has been regularly renewed since then, though actual techniques have remained secret. Last November, in the wake of several suicide bombings in Israel, a Government commission authorized harsher methods of coercion. The technique of shaking, in which a detainee's head is shaken violently from side to side and back and forth, came under special scrutiny in April when a Palestinian died of brain injuries three days after being detained. The man was suspected of being a local leader of the militant Islamic group Hamas. The issue was revived this week when the Attorney General, Michael Ben-Yair, ordered Shin Bet not to use the shaking method any longer. The newspaper Haaretz reported that Mr. Ben-Yair had acted after consulting with medical authorities and concluding that the method could cause serious brain damage or death. Though Mr. Ben-Yair was supported by Justice Minister David Libai, a special ministerial committee decided to extend the authority to use ""physical pressure"" for another two months. The committee added that from now on, the use of shaking would require the approval of the head of Shin Bet. In its statement, Amnesty International quoted Dr. Gorm Wagner, a professor of physiology from Copenhagen who investigated the treatment of Palestinian prisoners last August, as saying there was no doubt that the shaking procedure was ""likely to cause brain damage."" ""We welcome any ban on shaking, but that is not enough,"" Dr. Wagner was quoted as saying. ""We are convinced that other methods of pressure in use in Israeli detention centers constitute torture, and we urge that these methods be banned by the Israeli Government immediately."" Dr. Wagner said that during his investigation, he had asked a former detainee to demonstrate the shaking technique on him. ""I stopped him after three seconds,"" the doctor said. ""Twelve hours later I was still feeling the after-effects."""
