"Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi's campaign of repression at home and support of terrorism abroad have created a growing opposition to his regime. It includes key aides who helped in his coup in 1969 but have since defected. According to State Department officials and an Arab diplomat with an intimate knowledge of Libyan affairs, the list of defectors now includes the regime's first Prime Minister, former members of the ruling Revolutionary Council and several ambassadors. Some have openly broken. Others have made no public announcement but refuse to return home. One important defector was Mohammed Magaryef, Libya's former auditor general who vigorously sought to combat corruption in the regime's early years. His zeal found him no favor and he was reassigned as Ambassador to India. There he publicly broke with the Qaddafi Government last summer. Kikhia Quietly Quit Mansur Rashid Kikhia, Colonel Qaddafi's Foreign Minister in 1972 and 1973, is a recent example of a silent dissident. He quietly left his post as Libya's chief delegate to the United Nations last September but made no open statement. His silence enables him to represent several Arab human rights groups before the United Nations, which bars open dissidents from its headquarters. Most authorities, including the State Department's annual report on human rights practices, agree that there has been a marked increase in Libyan domestic repression in the last two years. The Arab diplomat estimated that several hundred Libyans had been jailed for political opposition. Torture, beatings and summary executions as well as the disappearance of victims in police custody have been reported. One estimate puts the total of political victims since 1980 at 2,000, but the State Department document says that ''abuses of this magnitude have not been conformed.'' More than 40,000 Libyans are now studying or working abroad, and the dissidents have been most visible among that group. An opposition leader in the United States, who declined the use of his name for fear of retaliation, asserts that 2,000 of the 5,000 Libyans studying here have joined an underground organization, the Free Libyan Students Union. But Washington officials think this number is exaggerated. First Premier Among Dissidents Among others who have openly broken with the Qaddafi regime are Dr. Mahoud Soliman al-Maghreby, Mr. Qaddafi's first Prime Minister and a former United Nations representative and Ambassador to Britain; Abdel Moneim el-Huni, a former member of the Revolutionary Council who aided in the 1969 coup that toppled King Idris I and who then headed Mukhabarat, the Libyan intelligence agency; Omar Abdullah Meheishi, another former member of the Revolutionary Council, a former Minister of Economy and Planning and the leader of an unsuccessful coup in 1975; Yahia Omar, a wealthy Libyan financier; Fadel Massoudi, a prominent journalist whose newspaper, Al Maidan, was closed as early as 1971, and Amnad Hwas, one of Colonel Qaddafi's personal army instructors who defected a few months ago from his post as acting head of Libya's mission to Guyana. Last March, a Libyan ''revolutionary'' court sentenced Messrs.  Magaryef, Omar and Massoudi to death in absentia. Some Defect Quietly Those who have quietly broken include Ezzedin Ghadamsi, who gave up his post as Ambassador to Austria last year, and Anis Ahmed Shetwey, a former oil minister who now works for an American oil company that he does not want to identify. Several in this group, including Mr. Kikhia, have been warned that they have been singled out by Tripoli for assassination.  ''Qaddafi can suffocate the opposition inside Libya,'' the Arab diplomat said, ''but he fears those outside. The balance of force within Libya is in Qaddafi's favor.'' But, the diplomat added, ''the country is not dead,'' implying that a domestic underground exists.  The strength of the opposition abroad reasonably accounts for the wave of killings and attempted killings that have occurred in the last year. Local police have linked Libyan gunmen to attacks in London, Athens, Rome, Beirut and, last fall, in Fort Collins, Colo.  Nearly all of the 11 persons slain abroad were students. The target of the Fort Collins assault -if the charges are correct it would be the first attempted assassination of a Libyan in the United States - was Faisal A. Zagallai, a student at Colorado State University. He escaped death but was blinded in his right eye. Qaddafi Said to Direct Assassins According to the Arab diplomat, the killers operate on instructions from Colonel Qaddafi's personal office. The first group of assassins, the diplomat said, was drawn from Libyan military jails in the mid-1970's. Young men convicted of rape, theft and other crimes were offered freedom in exchange for executing Colonel Qaddafi's foes. Several, however, defected themselves. As a result, according to the envoy, the regime turned to civilian zealots. Some were said to have been trained by a former Central Intelligence Agency operative, Francis Edward Terpil. He has been charged in a Federal indictment with running a terrorist training camp in Libya and soliciting a gunman to kill a former member of the Revolutionary Council, Mr. Meheishi. Mr. Terpil, a fugitive believed to be living in Beirut, was convicted in his absence in Manhattan Supreme Court on May 15 of selling guns to undercover agents for the New York District Attorney. Washington officials say that the Terpil school, whose faculty included former Green Berets, has been ''phased out.'' Colonel Qaddafi is now said to rely on East German and Bulgarian instructors. Link Seen to Embassies Orders and funds for the Libyan killers, officials here say, were transmitted through Libyan embassies, or ''People's Bureaus,'' overseas. Last year, President Carter expelled six Libyan diplomats who were reportedly engaged in those affairs. But the failure to shut down the mission entirely and the six-month search for Mr.  Zagallai's assailant troubled Libyan dissidents in the United States. The dissidents knew, moreover, of Mr. Terpil's purported activities and assumed, as one put it, ''that the Americans were covering the Libyan regime because of oil interests.'' Twelve American oil companies draw 550,000 barrels daily of highgrade crude oil from Libya's wells.  Last April, however, the Federal Bureau of Investigation arrested a former Green Beret who has been charged with the attempted murder of Mr. Zagallai. Two weeks later, President Reagan closed down the Libyan Embassy in Washington and sent home its 27 representatives. The State Department said that the new Administration wanted to send a clear signal to Tripoli that it would not tolerate the training of terrorists, assassinations, intimidation of Libyans abroad or interference with Libya's African neighbors. The Libyan dissidents in the United States reacted jubilantly to those measures and have now added the United States to Egypt, Iraq and Morocco as countries in which they feel safe. Not a United Opposition The opposition to the Qaddafi regime, like many exile movements, is badly fragmented. There are groups of Arab nationalists, Islamic fundamentalists, progressive, or left, and liberal factions. They publish leaflets, posters and magazines and try to smuggle them into Libya through sympathizers in the customs, secret service, army and police. Colonel Qaddafi has taken extraordinary measures to choke off dissidence and protect himself. He transfers army officers every few months to prevent any of them from gaining a loyal following. The shifts are so rapid that the Defense Intelligence Agency in the Pentagon says that it has trouble keeping up to date on the Libyan order of battle, the roster of who commands what units where. According to the Arab diplomat, officers are forbidden in barracks after 3 P.M., and troops are issued a minimum of ammunition. State Department officials said Colonel Qaddafi, who once freely walked the streets of Libya, playing soccer with children, had virtually sequestered himself. His barrack in the Tripoli suburb of Aziya is ringed with antiaircraft artillery, machine guns and tanks. Food Shortage Reported Despite Libya's oil, which brings in about $25 billion a year, there are shortages of food and other necessities. Libya is short of skilled administrators."
