"Key members of Congress responsible for setting foreign aid levels say that Israel's treatment of Palestinians in the occupied territories is unacceptable and could weaken Congressional support for American aid to Israel. The chairmen of the Congressional panels that appropriate foreign aid, Representative David R. Obey and Senator Patrick J. Leahy, said this week that human rights would be a more important consideration than ever before in United States decisions about foreign aid. The two men said that Congress was unlikely to cut aid for Israel this year. But they said that Israel could not count on receiving the same amount, $3 billion a year, in the future if it continued to shoot at Palestinian demonstrators, deport them, detain them without trial and blow up their houses. Criticism Becomes More Open Lawmakers are increasingly open in their criticism of such actions, which were rarely mentioned at Congressional hearings last year. Mr. Leahy said that on a trip to Israel last month, he was ''very blunt'' with Israeli officials in expressing concern about ''serious human rights violations on their part.'' ''They will get their money this year,'' Mr. Leahy said, referring to the $3 billion. ''But they build up enormous resentment in the United States, and in the future it will hurt them.'' Israeli officials have rejected such criticism and defended the conduct of Israeli soldiers as an appropriate response to Palestinian demonstrators who engage in violence and pose a danger to Israel's security. Mr. Obey and Mr. Leahy are looking for new ways to tie foreign aid to progress on human rights, not only in Israel but also in El Salvador, the Philippines, the Sudan and other countries. Lawmakers Back Rights Report In separate interviews, the lawmakers endorsed the conclusion of a new State Department report that said Israel's response to the Palestinian uprising ''led to a substantial increase in human rights violations'' in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip last year. Any move to cut aid would be opposed by many of Israel's friends in Congress and by pro-Israel groups in the United States. They say that such aid advances American interests. In addition, they say that Israel, shaken by America's decision to start talking to the Palestine Liberation Organization, needs reassurance from the United States. In the absence of such reassurance, they say, Israel is unlikely to make concessions as part of a political settlement with its Arab neighbors. Mr. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat, and Mr. Obey, a Wisconsin Democrat, are chairmen of the Foreign Operations Subcommittees of the Senate and House Appropriations Committees. They have an important say in determining who gets foreign aid and how much. Mr. Obey said that Israel was not the world's worst violator of human rights by any means, but that the United States had ''a higher visible responsibility'' to investigate its human rights practices because Israel got more American aid than any other country. Cuts in Foreign Aid Expected In a year when dozens of domestic programs must be cut, there will inevitably be cuts in foreign aid as well, Mr. Obey said. Overall, foreign aid totals $13.9 billion this year, but next year it will probably be in the range of $12 billion to $12.5 billion, he said. In the past, Congress has protected aid for Israel. But Mr. Obey said: ''You really have to ask, 'At what point do you stop doing Israel a favor by exempting them from sharing the cuts?' Does it serve any country - Israel, Egypt or Timbuktu - to be exempted so visibly from those cuts?'' Richard Schifter, the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, said, ''It is simply a fact of life that higher standards are being set in the case of Israel than are set elsewhere.'' In a speech in Florida on Friday, Vice President Dan Quayle said it was not proper to judge Israel by ''the grisly standards'' of some of its neighbors. ''Israel judges itself, and is judged by others, on the basis of the standards which prevail in the democratic West,'' he said. ''On the basis of these standards, the status quo on the West Bank and Gaza Strip is unacceptable.'' Aid for Philippines in Doubt As part of an agreement with the Philippines in October, the United States said it would try to provide much larger amounts of aid in return for the right to continue operating military bases there. But Mr. Obey said, ''It's going to be very tough to get additional money for anybody.'' ''We all have tremendous respect'' for Corazon C. Aquino, the President of the Philippines, he said. ''But it is obvious that she is not able to establish the kind of grip she needs on the military in order to reduce human rights violations.'' Congress appears to be even more concerned about problems in El Salvador, where right-wing death squads have emerged again after several years of being relatively inactive. The Administration has requested $386 million of aid for El Salvador, including $85 million for military equipment. Mr. Obey said he was considering an unusual procedure under which El Salvador could get half of the money at the start of the next fiscal year. The other half would be held in reserve and could not be disbursed unless Congress voted to release it."
