"In an unusually frank revelation, the senior Israeli Army commander in the occupied West Bank said in a newspaper interview published today that his soldiers must kill wanted Palestinian militants. The statement by Maj. Gen. Ilan Biran to the newspaper Haaretz was the first time that a top-ranking military officer has publicly defined the army's aim as killing fugitives, rather than arresting them. The army has consistently maintained that soldiers have orders to capture wanted men, and it has denied assertions by Palestinians and human rights groups that its undercover units have orders to kill. But in the past, army officers have indicated that soldiers have a free hand to shoot militants considered armed and dangerous. Maj. Gen. Danny Yatom, a former Central Command chief and now Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's military adviser, said three years ago that soldiers could shoot without warning at Palestinians brandishing guns. And last year, the previous army Chief of Staff, Lieut. Gen. Ehud Barak, said in a newspaper interview that of 12 Palestinians on a most-wanted list in 1992, only two remained alive. ""We assume that there are still four or five squads that we have to kill,"" General Biran said in response to a question about the number of fugitives at large in the West Bank. The general heads the army's Central Command, an area that includes the West Bank. Israeli soldiers have killed dozens of fugitives in the occupied territories in recent years, and human rights monitors have asserted that in some cases no effort was made to capture them alive. The rights groups have accused the Israeli authorities of summary killings that violate international law. In Hebron last week, Israeli security forces ambushed and killed three Palestinian fugitives, riddling their car with bullets. The army said that the three had been armed and apparently on their way to an attack, and that they had died in a gun battle. The army described them as members of the militant Islamic group Hamas and said they were suspected of killing several Israelis in a series of shootings over the last two years. In response to a question this week, an army spokesman said the army's aim was ""to catch suspects and bring them to justice."" But he added that soldiers face ""armed terrorists who do not hesitate to shoot and are not subject to any law."" More questions about Israeli practices in the West Bank were raised today when a pathologist who examined a Palestinian who died in custody this week said the man had been tortured. The Justice Ministry is conducting an inquiry to determine whether the prisoner, Abd al-Samed Hreizat, a 30-year-old computer expert from Hebron, had been harshly treated by his interrogators. The army said Mr. Hreizat had been arrested on suspicion of being a local leader of the Qassam Brigades, the armed wing of Hamas. A series of deadly attacks by Hamas led the Government in November to approve tougher interrogations of militants by the Shin Bet security service. The evening after his arrest early Saturday, Mr. Hreizat was hospitalized in a coma, and he died on Tuesday. A lawyer representing Mr. Hreizat's family said the prisoner had suffered severe brain damage. The pathologist, Dr. Derrick Pounder of the University of Dundee in Scotland, said the death ""was unnatural and was a result of torture,"" and had been caused by ""trauma to the brain."" With the cooperation of the Israeli authorities, he took part on behalf of the prisoner's family in an autopsy with two Israeli pathologists. All three agreed that the death had been violent, he said. ""The pattern of injury is that of a method of torture well known to be used by the Shin Bet and documented by human rights organizations on the basis of statements by detainees,"" Dr. Pounder said. Rights groups have reported that Palestinian prisoners are often subject to beatings, sleep deprivation and confinement in painful positions. Dr. Pounder's work was sponsored by Physicians for Human Rights, a Boston-based group that has sent him to conduct similar autopsies in the past on Palestinian prisoners who have died in Israeli jails."
