"For the first time since the revolution that overthrew the Shah, the Iranian Government has agreed in writing to allow a United Nations inspector to enter the country to investigate human rights abuses, diplomats say. In a recent letter to Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar, Iran's representative, Ambassador Kamal Kharrazi, said the Government of President Hashemi Rafsanjani would admit the United Nations inspector and give him all the guarantees he needs to make his inquiries. As a result, a committee of the General Assembly agreed this week to drop the resolution that the Assembly routinely passes criticizing Iran's human rights record. Instead, it unanimously approved a milder text welcoming Iran's decision to admit the United Nations official, Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, and agreeing to discuss his findings next year.  Leaning a Little Westward The Iranian letter is seen by Western diplomats as a further sign that the Rafsanjani Government may be trying to adopt a more pragmatic foreign policy and move closer to the rest of the world. But they caution that it is unclear whether the invitation has the support of all the factions in Iran's complex power structure. The letter offered Mr. Pohl several guarantees, including the right to visit any prison in the country and interview inmates without government witnesses, as well as a pledge that the Government will not take reprisals against those he interviews. Iran has been under investigation for human rights abuses for eight years by the United Nations Human Rights Commission, which meets every March in Geneva. For the last five years the General Assembly has also debated Iran's human rights record and adopted resolutions critical of it. During all these investigations the Iranian authorities have never formally agreed to allow the United Nations to send an official into the country to investigate charges against Iran. Last year Mohammed Jaafar Mahallati, who was then Iran's representative here, promised to admit an investigator in an unsuccessful last-minute attempt to block a critical resolution. But he withdrew the invitation after the resolution was adopted. Shortly afterward, Mr. Mahallati was recalled to Teheran, where he is reported by Iranian exiles to be under arrest and possibly to have suffered a heart attack. In his report, Mr. Pohl, a Salvadoran, concluded that the change of government in Iran after Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's death in June has not led to greater respect for human rights. Western nations, eager to promote greater respect for human rights in the developing world, suffered two reverses last week as the General Assembly opened its annual debate on violations around the world. Taking Aim at China The West decided not to introduce a resolution criticizing China for human rights violations in connection with the brutal suppression of the student democracy movement, because the Human Rights Commission will take up this issue again next March. But later, the Netherlands, with broad Western support, proposed a more general resolution aimed at China that urged all governments to respect their citizens' right to freedom of expression and assembly. That resolution was defeated, with 85 countries voting against it, including the Soviet Union and most of the third world. In another reversal for the West, the third world nations that make up the nonaligned movement plan to propose a resolution saying the 42-member Human Rights Commission includes too many Western nations and should be increased in size to allow greater third world representation. This resolution is viewed as a prelude to an attempt at enlarging the commission next year by adding up to 10 members."
