"A Saudi diplomat who served until recently with his country's United Nations mission is seeking political asylum in the United States after accusing officials of his country of corruption, terrorism and human rights violations. The diplomat, Mohammed A. al-Khilewi, wrote in an affidavit that he had about 14,000 documents showing ""a history, pattern and practice of terrorism and violations of human rights which would terribly embarrass my country and might cause the current regime to seek personal retaliation against me."" Mr. Khilewi's lawyer, Leon Wildes of Wildes & Weinberg in Manhattan, said today that he would file the affidavit and other documents on Tuesday in applying for political asylum. Unusual for a Saudi Such a request is unusual for a Saudi official. The United States considers Saudi Arabia its closest Arab ally and a major customer for weapons exports. Saudi Arabia is also the country's largest foreign oil supplier. Mr. Khilewi, who is now in hiding with his wife and three children, said in an interview that he had been warned that his life would be in danger if he pressed his accusations and did not return home. The accusations include allegations of financial improprieties by Saudi diplomats and surveillance of American Jewish groups. Mr. Khilewi also said he had evidence that Saudi Arabia had funneled money through Jordan to Hamas, an extremist Islamic group in the Israeli-occupied territories, and given the group information on building bombs. The Saudi mission to the United Nations referred inquiries to the country's embassy in Washington. Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to Washington, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, did not return a phone call. Mr. Khilewi, a first secretary at the mission, first broke publicly with his Government on May 17 when he sent a telegram to Saudi dignitaries including Crown Prince Abdullah, accusing officials of corruption, misgovernment and discrimination against women. Told to Go Home The day after the telegram was sent, the affidavit said, ""a security operative for the intelligence service of the Saudi Arabian Government approached me in my home and told me to ""go back to Saudi Arabia or you, your family in Saudi Arabia, your wife and kids will be killed."" Mr. Khilewi said the embassy had offered to send a jet to fly him to Washington for a meeting in the Watergate Hotel to discuss his accusations. But Mr. Khilewi said he had refused, fearing that it was a plot to force him to return to Saudi Arabia. He repeated the charges in a public statement issued on June 6 through a London-based Saudi opposition movement called the Committee for the Defense of Legitimate Rights in Saudi Arabia. Mr. Khilewi said large sums of official money passing through the United Nations mission and the Washington embassy were regularly deposited in New York banks for several months before being transferred, and he said the interest had been taken by members of the staff. ""If it's over a million dollars, they know they have to account for it,"" he said, ""so they take interest. Smaller sums disappear."" He said he thought that about $40 million had been misappropriated in this way last year. Mr. Khilewi produced letters and documents in English showing that a $9.7 million check from the Saudi Government for part of the country's United Nations dues, and a check from the United Nations reimbursing the Saudis $2.211 million for peacekeeping expenses in Somalia, had been used to buy certificates of deposit at major New York banks. The letters authorizing purchase of the certificates were signed by Saudi Arabia's representative at the United Nations, Gaafar M. Allagany, but did not indicate who owned the certificates or who was the beneficiary of the interest earned. Two documents in Arabic, which Mr. Khilewi said were top secret, dealt with Jewish groups in the United States. The first, he said, was a request for information about activities of the Jewish Defense League and the Jewish Defense Organization, which have their roots in the teachings of Rabbi Meir Kahane, the militant rabbi assassinated in New York. The second document was the mission's reply that it had undertaken electronic surveillance of the groups, Mr. Khilewi said. He said he also had evidence showing that Saudi Arabia had given financial help through Jordan, as well as information about manufacturing bombs, to the extremist Muslim organization Hamas, which opposes peace with Israel and is a rival of the Palestine Liberation Organization. He did not produce documents relating to these allegations. There have been frequent reports in recent years that Saudi Arabia has aided Hamas, especially through financial aid to the fundamentalist group's social services network. The Saudi authorities sent a delegation of Mr. Khilewi's relatives to New York recently to try to persuade him to return. He said the Governor of Riyadh, Prince Salman, had sent a warning with the group that the authorities would ""get him"" if he stayed in America or even if he went ""to the moon."" Mr. Khilewi said that if granted asylum, he planned to work with opposition groups for the removal of the Saudi Government. In the affidavit, Mr. Khilewi said he had evidence ""showing terrorist activities perpetrated in Saudi Arabia and against other countries supported by Saudi Arabia in an effort to undermine peace in this region."" He also said King Fahd was ""trying continually to encourage discord between Arabs, Muslims and Jews."" The King's Government has faced growing internal criticism and demands for more democracy since the end of the Persian Gulf war in 1991. At the same time, its finances are under strain from years of heavy spending. The Government is also facing succession difficulties, a report published this month by the Washington Institute for Near East Policy asserts. The King is 73 and known to be in poor health. Crown Prince Abdullah, his heir, is believed to be in his 70's as well, and the second likely candidate for succession, Prince Sultan, turns 70 this year. ""The kingdom is facing the prospect of having to appoint a new king every two or three years,"" the report says."
