"In one of Turkey's most closely watched human rights cases, a court backed down today when police officers accused of torturing 14 young people refused to appear in court to face their accusers. A three-judge panel dropped the order after defense lawyers argued that the officers's anti-terrorist work would be compromised if they were forced to appear. The lawyers also argued that since nearly two years have passed since the reported torture, positive identification would be impossible. As a result of the ruling, it appears unlikely that the young people, who now range in age from 16 to 24, will ever have the chance to confront the officers they accuse of torturing them. They can make identifications through photos instead, the judges ruled. ""This decision is very negative, a serious blow to our country's honor and prestige,"" said Sabri Ergul, a lawyer for the young people. ""A court orders police officers to appear and face charges, the officers refuse, and then the court says, 'O.K., we made a mistake, you don't have to come.' ""For those who torture and violate human rights, this is a message that the Government tolerates what they do,"" Mr. Ergul said. ""Our political leaders don't say this explicitly, but decisions like this make the message clear."" Eleven of the 14 ""Manisa children,"" as they are known, were convicted of various crimes including membership in terrorist groups and bombing a shop, and sentenced to 2 to 12 years in prison. Five are in prison, and the rest are free pending appeals. Though many Turks charged with crimes related to terrorism claim that their confessions were extracted under torture, those claims are routinely rejected. But in a highly unusual step, families of the children have pressed charges against the officers they say tortured them. Two lawyers including Mr. Ergul, who is also a member of Parliament, say they saw the young people in jail after their arrest in December 1995, and that their condition suggested they had been tortured. Their case has attracted international attention. Rights groups have called it a crucial test of Turkey's willingness to pursue allegations of torture, and a German diplomat was in the crowded courtroom today. Several of the young people who claim to have been tortured were also in court, hoping -- in vain, as it turned out -- for a chance to point out their alleged abusers. ""They beat me, abused me sexually and tortured me with electric shocks,"" said Minure Apaydin, who is 18. ""I want them to be punished, but now I'm not sure it will ever happen."" The ""Manisa children"" have said they were guilty of nothing more than reading legally available leftist magazines and scrawling slogans on walls. Their lawyers are acting on the assumption that if the young people who have been convicted of crimes can prove they were tortured, they will be granted new trials. Turkish law, however, does not require retrials in such cases. The Turkish authorities concede there have been incidents of torture in detention centers, but insist that they are isolated and that courts are equipped to investigate them and to prosecute the suspects. Human rights issues are among the main obstacles to Turkey's attempts to join the European Union and to be accepted more warmly by Western governments."
