"On the day the cease-fire began in the Iran-Iraq war, Saddam Hussein, dictator of Iraq, launched a new military offensive. This was for vengeance - to punish the Kurdish people living in northern Iraq who had dared to pursue their long struggle for autonomy during the dictator's war against Iran. With his forces freed by the ceasefire, Saddam Hussein smashed the Kurds - possibly with mustard gas, which he has reintroduced in modern warfare. Ninety thousand Kurdish refugees are now huddled in tent cities along the Turkish border, with another 40,000 cut off from escape. This is a campaign of extermination aimed against an ancient ethnic group that wants only to keep its own language and customs in sarbasti - freedom. A classic example of genocide is under way, and the world does not give a damn. Three men are alive today who can boast of having made a major contribution to world depopulation: Idi Amin of Africa, Pol Pot of Asia and Saddam Hussein of the Middle East. The Iraqi trails the Asian in the number slaughtered only because his nuclear capability was curtailed by the Israelis; otherwise, he would surely have incinerated five million residents of Teheran. However, Saddam is still active, and with several million Kurds at his mercy, he may yet pass Pol Pot in megamurders. The Iraqi dictator evidently sees a cease-fire as a time for getting even. He will one day turn his aggressive attention to Syria's Assad, the only Arab leader to have helped Iran, but first he is intent on bloodily crushing all self-determination aspirations within his own borders. For a millenium, Kurdistan has been a place but not a nation. Today the nearly 20 million Kurds live under three flags in Iran, Iraq and Turkey, with some in Syria and the Soviet Union. The Iranians supplied the Iraqi Kurds with arms to harass Saddam, and the Iraqi dictator armed the Iranian Kurds to harass the Ayatollah's army. The Kurds, though split into factions and aware they were being used as pawns, saw the Iran-Iraq war as a chance to establish a kind of autonomy if not independence. But Iran-Iraq peace means retribution and death. Let us marvel at the reaction: United Nations peacemakers in Geneva are concerned only with the interests of member nations, not with the lives of the Kurdish people or with the proliferation of poison gas. Not even a cluck of sympathy comes out of the U.N. Secretary General, who does not want to offend Baghdad or Teheran. The United States, in its Reagan-era assertiveness, did manage to issue one small cluck. The State Department spokesperson has said that if the reports of mass exodus of refugees are true, then what is going on would be ''a grave violation of international human rights.'' How's that for taking action to stop slaughter of innocents? (Presumably a double-cluck, or even escalation to a loud harrumph, would cause us to lose influence with Saddam, whom we helped to wear down Iran; why waste an i.o.u.?) The Turks, who severely repress their own Kurdish minority (they call the Kurds ''mountain Turks'' and forbid the Kurdish langauge) are accepting some refugees from Saddam's wrath. That's something; not much, but at least not the turning-away we get from the totalitarian Arab world or the amoral Soviet Union. The world's film crews are too comfortable in Israel's West Bank, covering a made-for-TV uprising of a new ''people,'' to bother with the genocidal campaign against a well-defined ethnic group that has been friendless throughout modern history and does not yet understand the publicity business. For television, inaccessibility is no excuse for ignoring the news; the ability of color cameras to bring home the horror of large-scale atrocities imposes a special responsibility on that medium to stake out murder scenes or get firsthand accounts from refugees. What about the two candidates for leader of the free world? If ever asked about stopping this killing, Mr. Dukakis would propose mailing a stern postcard to the U.N. and Mr. Bush might offer a little homily on evenhandedness. We could stop the killing by (a) demanding a Security Council investigation and linkage of human rights to the Geneva peacemaking, (b) bringing Kurdish refugees to the U.S. for testimony, (c) encouraging wider Turkish aid and (d) leaning on Iraq by threatening an early pullout of Persian Gulf ships. If this gets no results quickly, we can slip Stinger missiles to Massoud Barzani in the hills to bring down the gassing gunships. The Kurds say Pesh Merga - ''Forward to Death.'' That is a slogan of defiance, but it has also been a description of their fate. People who want only peace and freedom deserve America's attention and support."
