"The Turkish Government categorically denied today that any threat had been made to Jews here in retaliation for Armenian participation in a scheduled international conference in Tel Aviv on genocide. The Israeli charge d'affaires in Ankara, Calon Liel, also said there had been no pressure on the 20,000 Jews in Turkey ''to the best of our knowledge.'' Mr. Liel, who since April has had ''mutual exchanges of information'' with Turkish officials on the genocide conference, informed the Foreign Ministry today that all Israeli official and semiofficial institutions had withdrawn from the conference and that other participants had been urged to do the same. He expressed the hope that the organizers would decide to cancel the conference, scheduled to open June 17, if it turned into a small private seminar without official backing. Recent reports that Turkey had threatened to sever diplomatic relations with Israel and take reprisals against Turkish Jews were officially described here as as ''totally false.'' Turkish Jews Deny Threats Jewish leaders in Turkey also expressed dismay over the reports and denied that they had received any kind of threats.  ''We are shocked by the article in The New York Times saying our lives and livelihood were threatened,'' said Yako Veissid, counselor of the Chief Rabbinate in Istanbul. ''There was absolutely no pressure, no threat from the Turkish Government.'' Elie Wiesel, a Boston University professor who is one of the organizers of the conference, had told The Times that Israeli authorities were trying to get the organizers to cancel it because of what they said were threats by Turkey to sever diplomatic relations with Israel and take other measures against the lives and livelihood of Turkish Jews. A Foreign Ministry spokesman, Nazmi Akiman, said today, ''We are not against the conference in Tel Aviv but oppose any linkage of the Holocaust to the Armenian allegations of genocide.'' Ankara denies charges that Turkey committed genocide against Turkish Armenians in 1915 and is particularly bitter because of an Armenian terrorist campaign that has killed 21 Turkish diplomats or their relatives since 1973. Mr. Akiman expressed ''satisfaction'' with Israel's decision to bar official participation in the conference and with the Israeli denial of any Turkish pressure. Turkey's Ambassador to the United States, Sukru Elekdag, said Thursday that Turkish Jews had the full rights and privileges of Turkish citizenship, and he rejected as ''preposterous'' any notion that they might be ''victimized'' because of the conference. Cites Refuge for Jews Ambassador Elekdag pointed out that even in the days of the Inquisition, Turkey provided refuge to thousands of Jews fleeing the Iberian Peninsula and that more recently tens of thousands of Jews escaping Nazi-occupied Europe found a haven in Turkey, with many becoming citizens. Turkey is the only Islamic nation besides Egypt to maintain diplomatic ties with Israel. Relations between the two nations were once very good but cooled after Israel declared Jerusalem its capital and annexed the Golan Heights. Ankara downgraded its diplomatic relations with Israel last year to the level of second secretary, but despite Arab pressure it has refused to break the ties. ''The Armenians are trying to jump on the Israeli train,'' Mr.  Akiman said. ''They are making a deliberate attempt to benefit from the general sympathy for the Jews.'' He said the Armenians had first tried to identify their case with the killing of millions of Jews in Germany during World War II when they tried to establish a presence in the Holocaust Museum in Washington last year. Turkey protested the attempt then, and the Armenians were kept out."
