"Wearing a well-tailored beige robe beneath a black cloak and a white turban around a head that is shaded with a short full beard, Ayatollah Jalal Ganjei looks pretty much like any other ayatollah. Listening to him over a cup of coffee is another matter. Some people would say that he sounds like an anti-ayatollah ayatollah, although that would not be quite right either. In the 1960's, he was a student of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini of Iran, who was then exiled in Iraq. In 1970 the young scholar returned to Iran, and in April 1972 he was arrested by the Shah's secret police and imprisoned for six years. The charge was ""advocating Islamic Marxism,"" the terms that the Shah's Government used for sympathizing with the Mujahedeen, a radical movement that combined Islam with elements of Marxist thought, much as liberation theology did with Catholicism in Latin America. But Ayatollah Ganjei has not fared well since Ayatollah Khomeini's revolution either. In 1981, he supported the Mujahedeen when its growing challenge to the Government was violently repressed. For more than a decade, he has been in exile, condemned to death in absentia. Nine of his relatives, including a brother and a brother-in-law, have been killed by Iranian Government forces. In 1982, his 18-year-old son was surrounded on a Teheran street and shot to death. Ayatollah Ganjei speaks of these things in a disconcertingly dispassionate way, but he laughs grimly at the absurdity of the two arrests of his 70-year-old mother. Ayatollah Ganjei visited the United Nations last week to denounce thousands of executions, detentions and other human rights violations by the Iranian Government. He was quite clearly eager to disabuse people of the notion that such atrocities had ceased under the Government of President Hashemi Rafsanjani, one of the Middle Eastern leaders who are forever demonstrating the unsuspected elasticity of the term ""moderate."" Like many other Muslims, Ayatollah Ganjei likes to quote verse 256 of Surah 2 of the Koran: ""There is no place for compulsion in religion."" The Koran, he maintains, is against racism, against repression of women and against slavery. He bluntly calls the fundamentalism of Ayatollah Khomeini or President Rafsanjani ""bigotry."" ""This notion of Islam as all-encompassing is correct,"" he said in response to a question about Islam's lack of separation of religion and state, but adding, ""A part of this all-encompassing religion is the principle that difference of viewpoints is accepted."" Ayatollah Ganjei condemned the death sentence pronounced by the Iranian Government on the author Salman Rushdie as ""an un-Islamic decree"" that was politically motivated and aimed ""simply at a thought."" ""The biggest threat to religion has always been what is done in the name of religion,"" he added. But Islam has been his own bulwark through years of struggle and loss."" Islam ""has given me the courage not to succumb and not to surrender, and has given me a heart with love and affection,"" he said. What about living under a death sentence? In France, where Ayatollah Ganjei resides, Iranian agents assassinated former Iranian Prime Minister Shafpour Bakhtiar last August. ""I try to keep vigilant in protecting myself,"" Ayatollah Ganjei said, but ""if this is my fate, to be slain, in order to achieve freedom for my country, this is my fate."" Told in his words, Ayatollah Ganjei's story is a moving one. It is also political propaganda, or at least it would be if a few other facts were not added. The human rights abuses he reports -- the executions and torture that have gripped his own family -- are terribly real. His personal courage and religious desire for a renewed Islam are not in question. But just as he protests that Islam can be used to justify a lock on power by religious leaders in Iran, his own status as a clergyman can be used as a Good Housekeeping Seal for political forces that raise many legitimate doubts. In fact, many knowledgeable Iranians smiled at the very idea that Ayatollah Ganjei was being called an ayatollah. The title is traditionally reserved, they say, for Shiite authorities with scholarly attainments and reputations far beyond his. They concede, however, that there has been a kind of grade inflation in Shiite titles and an increasingly political character to the designation of individuals as ayatollahs. More serious questions are raised by the Mujahedeen, the group with whom Ayatollah Ganjei has been in working association for decades.  Members of the group have unquestionably been among the chief victims of the fundamentalist Iranian Government. But the organization was also a revolutionary force quite willing to employ violence for its own purposes in the struggle for power that erupted in Iran once the marriage of convenience with Ayatollah Khomeini broke down. The Mujahedeen speak the language of Western human rights. Over the last decade, the organization has muted its radical and even its Islamic character. But the organization retains a strong authoritarian cast, with a cult of personality centered on its leaders, Massoud Rajavi and his wife, Maryam. The organization now has its headquarters in Iraq, and its fervent assertions of total independence from the government of Saddam Hussein are looked upon skeptically. What would be the Mujahedeen's dedication to human rights be if members took power? No one can say for sure, and perhaps that is answer enough. There is a lesson here about the involvement of religious leaders in politics. Whether in the Middle East, Africa, the United States or Central America, such involvement may be unavoidable or even essential. It is never simple."
