"An Iranian who says he escaped from Iran last month after five years of imprisonment and torture in Iranian prisons came to the United Nations this week to describe his ordeal. The man, Vali Eshghi, said he was arrested by revolutionary guards in 1982 and accused of sympathizing with the People's Mujahedeen, a left-wing movement that opposes the Iranian Government. At a news conference Wednesday he displayed scars and wounds that he called a result of five years of torture that he said destroyed one eye and left him deaf and paralyzed on the left side of his face. Mr. Eshghi's visit to the United Nations was arranged by the Mujahedeen in an attempt to win support for a General Assembly resolution that would ''express concern'' over Iranian human rights violations. A United Nations study issued last month found evidence that Iran systematically tortured and executed political and religious prisoners. Mr. Eshghi's account could not be independently corroborated, although it was consistent with an Amnesty International report on Iran in May. That found a ''long-term pattern of abuses'' against political and religious prisoners, including forced amputations and the seizing of friends and relatives as hostages when suspects escape. Mujahedeen at News Conference The Mujahedeen maintains that 70,000 people have been executed in Iran since 1981 and 47,000 arrested for political crimes in the last year. At the news conference, Ali Safavi, a spokesman for the Mujahedeen, called on the United Nations to ''condemn in the most decisive form'' the Government of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. As in the past, Iran refused to respond this year to the charges assembled by the United Nations. A United Nations investigator was barred from entering Iran on the grounds he was not fluent in Islamic law. The General Assembly is expected to consider the resolution on Iran Friday. At the news conference, Mr. Eshghi, who said he was an economics student in Arak before his arrest, removed his shoes and socks to display scars and wounds he said were the results of floggings with electric cable and bayonets. He described hours of interrogation in Evin prison near Teheran, long singled out by human rights groups as a site of torture in Iran. He said he and other prisoners had been strapped to benches and flailed or forced to hear other victims scream. One cellmate of Mr. Eshghi's had his toes chopped off by revolutionary guards, Mr. Eshghi said. Prison personnel gouged out the eyes of several prisoners sentenced to die, so the organs could be used as transplants for wounded Iranian soldiers, he said. Mr. Eshghi said he was not charged formally with any crime until February 1985, when he received a half-hour trial without a lawyer. He was sentenced to 20 years in jail for sympathizing with the Mujahadeen, and escaped from jail in June while being transferred from Arak, he said. He escaped from Iran in October, and lives in a West European country, he said."
