"A Palestinian woman was stabbed to death by masked youths in the occupied West Bank on Monday night, and Arabs said today that she was killed because she collaborated with Israel's security agency. Also on Monday night, two other Palestinians were shot dead by masked gunmen in the Gaza Strip. Doctors at Shifa Hospital in Gaza City originally said the victims, a 45-year-old woman and her 30-year-old son, had been shot by the army. But local Palestinians said today that it was unclear who killed the two Palestinians. They said the dead woman's 21-year-old daughter was suspected of collaborating with Shin Bet, the Israeli security agency, and may have been the intended target. The army said today that it had nothing to do with the deaths, and a spokesman said the military believed that the killings resulted from ''a gang war over drugs and prostitution.'' Woman Said to Recruit Informers In the West Bank, Palestinians said the fatal stabbing of a 43-year-old Nablus woman was retribution for her collusion with Shin Bet. They said the woman, Nadira al-Bulus, was a prostitute who worked with the security service and tried to recruit other women as informers. The Palestinians slain in the Gaza Strip were identified as Rivka Ayad and her son, Kamal. Efaf Ayad, the daughter who Arabs said was suspected of collaboration, was wounded in the attack. But today she denied that any member of her family had cooperated with the Israeli authorities. She said a group of masked men broke into the family's house in the Zaitun neighborhood late Monday night, cut the electricity and began shooting automatic rifles. Some Palestinians said the fact that Efaf Ayad was not transferred from Shifa to an Israeli hospital for her protection seemed to indicate that she was not a collaborator. No one claimed responsibility for the deaths. LONDON, April 18 (Reuters) - Amnesty International accused the Israeli Government today of effectively encouraging troops to kill or wound Palestinians during the uprising in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. The human rights organization said it was ''gravely concerned that senior Israeli authorities appear to have been condoning if not encouraging the excessive use of force by soldiers and border police knowing it would result in the death or injury of Palestinians.'' It urged Israel to set up an independent judicial inquiry. It said a large number of reports it had received did not support ''the Israeli authorities' standard justification for most of the shooting, that their forces only opened fire when their lives were in danger.'' In Jerusalem, Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir's spokesman, Avi Pazner, said the organization's charge was ''an outrageous allegation and a total lie. Our troops are under strict instructions not to cause any casualties and we take great care when it happens that there is an inquiry in every case.''"
