"The Israeli Government today criticized a State Department report accusing the military here of abusing Arab human rights, saying that the report failed to make clear that the army's actions were in response to Palestinian violence. ''Everything we are doing arises from Arab violence,'' said Moshe Raviv, a deputy director general at the Foreign Ministry, at a press briefing called to rebut the State Department's annual report on human rights worldwide. The American report was made public the day a similar but more critical document was released by a Palestinian legal-aid society here. Both reports said more Palestinians were killed by Israeli troops in 1989 than in 1988. Mr. Raviv pointed to ''the growing number of Palestinians murdered by Palestinians'' and added, ''In essence, a people is killing itself.'' An unofficial tally of Palestinian deaths in the occupied territories shows that 40 percent of the Palestinians killed there in the last six months have been slain by other Arabs. The Palestinian human rights report largely ignored this phenomenon. The State Department report accused Israel of causing avoidable deaths and injuries in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, destroying property, deporting Arab residents and using firearms excessively. ''The report is limited and does not take into account the whole political situation,'' Mr. Raviv said. ''I believe the United States and the American public understand the source of the violence, and that the minute the violence ends, so will the problems emanating from it.'' This afternoon, another Israeli official, the chief military prosecutor, Brig. Gen. Amnon Strashnov, said the American report ''presents facts, most of which I accept as correct.'' Hundreds of Palestinians have been killed in violent clashes with Israeli soldiers during the uprising, which began in December 1987. Thousands more have been injured. Seventy Israeli soldiers have been tried for using excessive force against Arabs. In its report, the Palestinian legal-aid society, Al Haq, said it found ''lawlessness at every level'' of the military administration."
