"Chisako Tezuka was arrested last year on suspicion of fradulently obtaining a loan. She says she was taken to the police station, stripped naked, subjected twice to a genital search, and forced to urinate while male police officers watched. She was questioned for 20 days in sessions in which she was handcuffed and roped around the waist, she said. She was never indicted, and the police discovered she had paid back the loan two months before. The police acknowledge that the questioning and genital search took place, although they dispute some of the details of Ms. Tezuka's account and deny that what happened constituted mistreatment. Ms. Tezuka is one of an estimated 100,000 people a year held for pre-trial detention in Japan's police cells. Since 1908, Japanese law has authorized such detention to relieve prison overcrowding, but a new bill that would continue the practice is drawing fire from human rights groups in Japan and abroad. These critics see detention as an undemocratic remnant of prewar Japan that permits human rights abuses. Protest Filed With U.N. A group of Japanese lawyers and scholars has filed a protest with the United Nations Committee on Human Rights, which criticized the practice in a meeting in July in Geneva. The Japan Bar Association has spoken out against the bill. And the prospect that a bill prolonging the detention system could be passed in this parliamentary session drove Ms. Tezuka to discuss her experiences publicly. ''Japanese people do not know what is going on,'' Ms. Tezuka said. ''The Japanese press has covered very little about this, even though it is a very serious issue for Japan, whether it will abandon human rights.'' The controversy comes at a difficult time for the police. A few widely publicized cases of police corruption have shaken public confidence, prompting the police to convene public meetings to discuss how to improve their image. Critics charge that the police rely too much on confessions and not enough on investigative skills, so that more complex crimes have remained unsolved. Especially troubling to human rights groups are charges of police abuse of power like the ones raised by Ms. Tezuka's case. Saying she was treated with ''dehumanizing brutality,'' the English-language Japan Times wrote, ''The victim's story recalls precisely the way the police behaved in prewar days.'' The detention system compounds these problems, critics say, because the police, shielded by secrecy, can control every aspect of a suspect's living conditions to extract confessions. Unlike their counterparts in the United States, Japanese lawyers are not allowed to be present while their clients are being questioned. Held in Police Cells Japanese law allows arrested suspects to be held in police cells rather than regular jails, usually for a limit of 23 days. Those arrested must be brought within 3 days to a judge, who will then authorize return to the police station for further questioning for 10 more days. The judge may grant an additional 10-day extension, and in certain serious crimes, one more extension of 5 days. Critics of detention argue that the police use this time, and the power detention gives them, to build their case against a suspect. ''In principle, arresting a person should be the final step after collecting evidence,'' said Toshikuni Murai, a professor of criminal law at Hitotsubashi University in Tokyo. ''In the United States, when the police arrest a person, there is usually enough proof to indict him. But in Japan, the arrest is the start of the investigation.'' Since 1945, 40 people have filed suit to overturn verdicts against them on the ground that they were forced to confess crimes they did not commit, according to the Japan Bar Association. Since 1963, courts have found 12 cases of false conviction, including 3 people sentenced to death and 3 to life imprisonment. Futaba Igarashi, secretary general of the Democratic Lawyers of Japan Association, a group that is spearheading the campaign against the bill, said she suspected many more cases existed, but most are hard to document. Akio Kanazawa, director general of the National Police Agency, said: ''There is no link between the existence of detention facilities in the police stations and the issue of forced confessions. Of course confession is important but it absolutely should not be forced. We are submitting the bill to give the legal basis for detention facilities so the level of treatment would be the same as in prisons.'' Account Called Inaccurate Yasuhiro Maeda, a public relations officer for the Metropolitan Police, said that Ms. Tezuka's account was inaccurate and that abuses in detention cells were exceptions, not the rule. He said that Ms. Tezuka was searched because there was a danger she might commit suicide and because her behavior had led the police to believe she might be hiding something in her sexual organs. ''We paid attention to her feelings and did not make her take off all her clothes - we allowed her to wear clothes on her upper body while checking her lower body,'' he said. Some recent books on detention written by former police officers, as well as testimony by former detainees, substantiate at least part of Ms. Tezuka's account. Ms. Igarashi has collected 30 accounts of police mistreatment of suspects while under questioning between 1980 and 1987 and submitted them to the United Nations Human Rights Committee. Whatever abuses exist, Professor Murai said, they will not end so long as lawyers' access to clients is restricted and police rely on confessions for evidence. ''Interrogation is conducted in a secret room, where violence or coercion to confess may occasionally occur,'' he said. ''Unless the technique of investigation which relies on confession disappears, this situation will not disappear.''"
