"A popular analogy applied to the Soviet war against the Afghan people is that Afghanistan is Moscow's ''Vietnam.'' That's superficially true. According to recent reports, the war has not won the wholehearted support of the Soviet people or even - as the high desertion rate suggests - the Soviet soldiers sent to Afghanistan. Thus, in the sense that it is an unpopular war, Afghanistan can indeed be said to be ''Moscow's Vietnam.'' But there the analogy ends. The Kremlin does not as a rule pay close attention to domestic public opinion. And unlike the war in Vietnam, the one in Afghanistan is largely hidden from the eyes of the world. These two factors make it possible for Babrak Karmal's puppet regime to pursue its campaign to ''Sovietize'' Afghan society and to destroy the freedom-fighters, the mujahideen. The mujahideen have two fundamental strengths: the support of the majority of their countrymen and their own determination and raw courage. Poorly equipped and disorganized at the outset, they have become increasingly effective. They control large areas of the countryside. Much to the Soviet Union's consternation, the ''limited contingent'' dispatched to Afghanistan has not been able to crush the mujahideen. Moscow's strategy is not aimed at winning a military victory per se but at cutting off the mujahideen from their base of support by terrorizing the Afghan people. The systematic bombardment of villages drives thousands of ''internal refugees'' into the cities, where presumably Soviet forces can exercise greater control over them. Concurrently, the secret police is conducting a broad campaign to arrest, interrogate and torture people suspected of opposing the regime. A former officer of the security police has described the following types of torture: giving electric shocks, tearing out finger nails, plucking out the beards of some prisoners, pressing on the throats of prisoners to force them to open their mouths while the guards urinate into them, setting police dogs on detainees, raping women in front of family members and other vile acts. These are more than ''human rights violations.'' For what is happening is not only torture but, in the strictest sense, genocide. Of the approximately 16 million Afghans in the country in 1980, an estimated one million have been executed or starved to death since the Soviet invasion. According to a report by Afghan Aid, a charitable organization, about half a million Afghans are in danger of starvation. Some four million refugees - more than one-quarter of the population - have fled to neighboring Pakistan and Iran. But the Afghan horror story has not penetrated our consciousness. It has not entered our lives. This is the key difference between Afghanistan and Vietnam. As one recent study has stated: ''Vietnam was a high-tech television war; Afghanistan is one of those old fashioned encounters that takes place in the dark.'' Television cameras are not allowed inside Afghanistan to film the children whose hands have been blown off or the tens of thousands of other mutilated victims of the Karmal regime. But this is no excuse for the de facto blackout by much of the world's media. Some three million Afghans refugees have fled to Pakistan; each one has a story to tell. Meanwhile, a far greater effort must be made to assist the freedom-fighters in their public-information campaign. The $500,000 grant Congress has approved for the Afghan media project, sponsored by the United States Information Agency, is a step in the right direction. This worthwhile initiative needs to be augmented by other efforts. The newly established Radio Free Afghanistan, which broadcasts into Afghanistan for a half an hour a day, should be upgraded and expanded. Mujahideen liaison offices should be established in cities such as New York, Paris and Toyko to help raise money for the resistance fighters and to tell their story to the world. Vietnam was fought in our living rooms on the evening news. Afghanistan is largely out of sight, out of mind. Soviet objectives in the region have not changed. Arrests, torture and executions continue unabated. To ignore all this is to do a grave injustice to the Afghan people."
