"When Paul Fireman, the chairman and chief executive of Reebok International Ltd., agreed to sponsor a 1988 rock music tour for Amnesty International, he had no idea this one good deed would lead him and his company in a new and risky direction. ""We were very cautious with the concert sponsorship,"" he said. ""We took a backseat role."" But the experience was so gratifying that Mr. Fireman, 47, has made human rights the in-house cause at Reebok, the athletic-shoe maker based in Stoughton, Mass. During the last four years, the company's foundation has given millions to activists around the world. Mr. Fireman's latest project is Witness, a program established by the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights. The program, which was announced in late March, will provide human rights advocates throughout the world with video cameras, computers and fax machines, so they can record abuses and then send the videotapes to television stations. ""This is a weapon that activists can use,"" Mr. Fireman said. ""Instead of just a few people watching, there will be millions of eyes that can witness abuses. This could be a powerful deterrent."" Reebok will also be continuing to give out its annual Human Rights Awards, which carry a $25,000 prize, to individuals under the age of 30. Reebok so far has honored more than a dozen people, most recently the three Russians killed in the aborted coup in the Soviet Union last year; Abubacar Sultan, national director of the Save the Children Federation, and Ashley Black, an 11-year-old in Marlboro, N.J., who spearheaded a drive to ban hate-related videos in her community. In contrast to giving money to a mainstream charity like the Red Cross, Reebok's brand of philanthropy carries the risk that it could easily offend consumers. Indeed, while the awards have generated invaluable publicity for Reebok, they have also prompted many irate phone calls. Two years ago, when Reebok honored Shawan Jabarin, a Palestinian activist in the occupied West Bank, the company got angry calls from several leaders of Jewish organizations. ""They wanted to know how I, who am Jewish, could do such a thing,"" Mr. Fireman said. ""We have to take risks to make something happen. If what we do helps to make a little peace, that makes me feel good."""
