"The State Department said today in its annual report on human rights that Iraq's ""abysmal record"" of repressing virtually every category of human rights worsened last year, but the report also criticized the records of America's Persian Gulf war allies -- Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Syria and Turkey. Indeed, the annual survey of human rights in 168 countries issued today by the State Department found that the record of Syria, an important ally against Baghdad, was barely distinguishable from that of Iraq, while Kuwait and Saudi Arabia regularly violated the rights of political prisoners and women. The report said that in Iraq ""almost every category of human rights dealt with in this report is severely restricted or nonexistent,"" with ""freedoms of speech and press and of assembly and association virtually non-existent."" 'Extreme Forms of Torture' Iraqi intelligence services, the report said, ""continued to conduct extensive surveillance and to use extra-legal means, including extreme forms of torture and summary execution of children as well as adults, to suppress anti-regime activity."" The State Department report, which is based on information gathered by American embassies and various human rights monitoring organizations, like Amnesty International, also said that last September, after Iraq invaded Kuwait, Iraqi troops killed 72 babies born prematurely at the Kuwait Maternity Hospital. The report said a doctor who responded to an emergency call ""found upon his arrival at the hospital the bodies of 72 premature babies, dumped onto the ground from their incubators by Iraqi troops who had then carted off the incubators."" The report said that Syria showed ""no significant improvement"" last year in respecting human rights, which ""remained tightly restricted in virtually all categories."" In Syria, it said, ""major human rights abuses, including torture, arbitrary arrest and detention, and denial of freedom of speech, press, association and the right of citizens to change their government continued to characterize the regime's record in 1990."" The report said Syria ""did continue to respond positively"" to specific requests from the United States about the status of Syrian Jews. The report said that ""in pre-invasion Kuwait, while there were significant restrictions on political rights, there was substantial Government respect for the integrity of the person."" Nevertheless, in 1990, the principal human rights concerns about Kuwait included ""restrictions on freedom of assembly and speech, the right of citizens to change their government, women's and worker rights, and instances of arbitrary arrest, mistreatment of prisoners, and lack of due process in trials of security cases."" In Saudi Arabia, the report said, ""there are no elected assemblies or political parties, and all forms of political expression except those favorable to the regime are forbidden."" While official controls make collection of detailed information difficult, the report said, ""there continue to be credible reports of toture and mistreatment of detainees, particularly political detainees. The report said the crisis arising from the invasion of Kuwait had provided much of the impetus ""for positive changes in the human rights situation in Saudi Arabia, such as the proposal for a consultative council."" But the gulf crisis also led to ""negative developments"" in Saudi Arabia, the State Department said, including ""the reaction against an unprecedented women's protest demonstration."" Although Israel reduced tensions with Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip through most of 1990, the end of the year saw a disturbing rise in violence, the department said."
