"Timing could hardly be more propitious for the HBO Showcase drama ""The Infiltrator,"" a based-on-fact look at Germany's violent right-wing organizations. Neo-Nazi obsessions with ethnic purity can also be found, of course, in countries as different as Bosnia and the United States. A footnote to the film says there are currently 300 active white supremacist groups in this country, including 160 skinhead gangs, operating in 40 states. ""The Infiltrator,"" a production of Carnival Films, a major British independent, is adapted by Guy Andrews from the nonfiction book ""In Hitler's Shadow,"" by Yaron Svoray and Nick Taylor. In 1992, Mr. Svoray (played here by Oliver Platt), an Israeli journalist and son of Holocaust survivors, is freelancing in Los Angeles for Israeli publications. His new assignment is to go to Berlin, where his father and grandfather were born, to report on a resurgence of Nazi violence in the reunified Germany. Mr. Svoray enters a world of skinhead thugs harassing shopkeepers who are largely Turkish and Arab. The police occasionally make arrests, but the smug vandals are usually let go with a conspiratorial wink. Gaining the confidence of some skinheads, Mr. Svoray assumes the name Ron Furey and begins working undercover, gradually getting to meet the real powers behind the youthful rabble. When his publisher refuses to go along with the plan, the journalist returns briefly to Los Angeles to get support from the Simon Wiesenthal Center for Holocaust Studies. Back in Berlin, he is soon working with a colleague, Rick Eaton (Arliss Howard), who poses as a rich American interested in supporting Nazi movements around the world. The ruse soon nets Svoray introductions to top Nazi figures like Ernest Bielert (Julian Glover), head of the Nationalist Front, which claims 7,000 members and 9,000 sympathizers. And then there is Dieter Creutz (Michael Byrne), the designated ""legitimate"" political leader of the movement, who exudes reason and restraint even while stealthily pushing his ethnic-cleansing agenda and the Nazi vision of a world filled with white Christian children. The dean of the Wiesenthal Center, Rabbi Marvin Hier (Alan King), realizes that there are probably 50 men like Creutz scattered throughout Germany but, he says, ""get one, and the others don't sleep so well."" Even after Mr. Svoray compiles an impressive file, naming names and pinpointing places, however, the German authorities are reluctant to act. ""We are anxious not to persecute the innocent,"" one says. No one in the Svoray report is ever prosecuted. But one year later, Germany's Interior Minister identified right-wing terrorism as the country's greatest internal security threat. Directed at breakneck speed by John Mackenzie (""The Long Good Friday""), ""The Infiltrator"" too often skims surfaces that cry out for more exploration. There are, though, several bows in the direction of balance. One Turkish cafe owner (George Jackos), himself a violence victim, tells Svoray: ""You can't blame a whole nation. The Germans are not an evil people. If I thought that, I would not have brought my family to live here."" As the film's solid cornerstone, Mr. Platt's portrait of Mr. Svoray manages to be a consistently intriguing combination of almost goofy, a bit sleazy and genuinely heroic. HBO, tonight at 8. An HBO Showcase presentation in association with Francine LeFrak Productions; a Carnival Films production; music by Hal Lindes; David Obst, co-producer; Francine LeFrak, and Colin Callender, executive producers; Brian Eastman, producer; teleplay by Guy Andrews; story by Robert J. Avrech and Mr. Andrews; based on the book ""In Hitler's Shadow,"" by Yaron Svoray and Nick Taylor; directed by John Mackenzie."
