"SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk  International An arms-for-hostages deal was explicitly described by William J. Casey in a memo written soon after the United States began the deals, an official who has seen the document said. Page A1 Mr. Casey's tumor was cancerous, his doctors confirmed, and therapy will begin as soon as he recovers from the surgery. The lymphoma tumor was removed from the left side of the C.I.A. director's brain last Thursday. Mr. Reagan urged early disclosure of a Senate panel's initial findings on the Iran affair so that he could make them public. A leader of the committee suggested that the request had a political motive and would be denied. Richard V. Secord refused to testify for the second time before a Congressional hearing on the Iran arms sales and the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels, a Congressional official said. The A.P. is balancing its coverage of the Iran affair with its desire not to endanger the Western hostages in Lebanon, executives say. The hostages include an A.P. reporter. Andrei D. Sakharov is in Moscow and has resumed his role as an outspoken critic of Soviet policies. Returning after seven years of internal exile in Gorky, he was greeted warmly at the Academy of Sciences. Italy has begun an inquiry into an Israeli nuclear technician's claims that he was abducted by Israeli agents in Italy has begun. Investigators seek to find out if any Italian laws were violated. Street protests spread to Beijing for the first time, as several thousand students from Qinghau University braved freezing temperatures to call for democracy. The Argentine Congress passed a bill that is expected to bring an end to the prosecution of military officers accused of human rights violations during the late 1970's and early 1980's. A contentious air in Paris greeted the holiday season as bus drivers refused to operate buses painted with holiday advertisements and as a chain of strikes erupted. Kazakhstan shake-up likely National The Voyager safely set world records for distance and endurance when it landed at Edwards Air Force Base after flying 25,012 miles nonstop on one load of fuel. The trip took 9 days 3 minutes 44 seconds. The Voyager is a no-frills aircraft, in many ways as crude as any airplane that ever flew, and its success had less to do with space-age technology than with its builders' sacrifices, improvisations and dedication. Sweeping changes in farm programs will be proposed in President Reagan's new budget, Administration officials said. The changes are designed to save more than $16 billion over the next five years. American Catholics have differed with the Vatican for almost 200 years. America has played an unusual and important role in the church, and recently the conflict has become sharper. A boat of Dominicans capsized near Puerto Rico and at least eight people drowned. The 28-foot boat was carrying 48 people across the treacherous Mona Passage to Puerto Rico. Protests to a planned Reagan library are being voiced in Palo Alto, Calif. Some residents say the Presidential library and museum west of the city would ruin one of the last undeveloped areas. The first 10 MX's are operational, the Pentagon said, having moved to full alert beneath the Wyoming plains on Monday. The action marks the first addition to the nation's arsenal in 16 years. Money for two new aircraft carriers will be requested by the Navy next year, the Pentagon said. The nuclear-powered carriers, to be completed in 1995 and 1998, would cost about $6.9 billion. A drug to treat leprosy was approved by the Federal Drug Administration. The drug, clofazimine, has also been used to treat infections in some AIDS patients, but its maker stressed it was not an AIDS cure. The last evidence in a police trial was presented in Miami, the rebuttal testimony on behalf of seven former policeman accused of possession of cocaine, racketeering and involvement in the deaths of three suspects. Homeless people in Lexington, Ky., are rarer than in bigger cities. But 200 or so people are without homes, and the once-genteel small town is trying to cope. Greyhound will sell its bus operations after 73 years, the company said. The prospective owners have agreed to pay $350 million for the division. Much of Chicago blacked out Audi 5000 recall is urged Washington Talk A battle over arms proliferation At home with Senator Leahy Regional Three white teen-agers were ordered held without bail on second-degree murder charges in the racial attack last week in Howard Beach, Queens. A prosecutor said they had admitted playing a part in the attack. One of the suspects dated a black girl who said that the teen-ager, Jon Lester, who has been charged in the Queens racial attack, ''treated me better than all my other boyfriends, even my black boyfriends.'' Religious and civil-rights groups that condemned the Queens attack formed a coalition, the New Civil Rights Coalition, which leaders said would join a demonstration planned next weekend. An $8.6 billion transit plan was delayed when Senate Republicans held out for more aid for commuter railroads. The five-year plan would rebuild New York City's subway, bus and commuter rail lines and freeze fares for three years. Emergency foster parents take in children 12 years old or younger who need temporary, late-night placement. One East Harlem family has taken in more than 300 youngsters in nine years. Clinton overcomes radon fears Jean Harris is denied clemency Neediest Cases"
