"The United States Embassy in Kuwait has sent the State Department details to bolster disputed accounts of how occupying Iraqis killed babies at Kuwaiti hospitals in 1990 by disconnecting their incubators. Citing three witnesses and a number of second-hand accounts, the cable said embassy officials ""are convinced that premature and newborn babies died when Iraqis removed life-support systems from Kuwaiti hospitals."" In angry tones, the cable, sent this week by Ambassador Edward W. Gnehm, called recent reports casting doubt on the reported atrocities ""smug and cynical,"" ""revisionist"" and ""outrageous."" The Ambassador harshly criticized two human rights groups, Amnesty International and Middle East Watch, and news organizations for saying since the war that their investigations had failed to substantiate the reports. A Young Woman's Account Accounts of babies being removed from incubators to die were widely reported before American forces expelled the Iraqis from Kuwait and lent emotional power to the Bush Administration's and the Kuwaiti Government's oratory as the allies prepared to go to war. But since the war, the unproven assertions have been questioned frequently. The dispute was revived last month when it was disclosed that a young Kuwaiti woman who had testified in 1990 before a Congressional caucus, tearfully describing infanticide at a hospital, was the daughter of Kuwait's Ambassador in Washington. Although her account was not disproved, its credibility was questioned in an article on the Op-Ed page and in an editorial in The New York Times, and in other news accounts. Kenneth Roth, director of Middle East Watch, responded to the cable today by saying that his group could not absolutely rule out isolated cases of baby-killing, but that painstaking research last year had disproved reports of widespread infanticide. ""We can say almost certainly that there was no mass theft of incubators and no mass killing of infants,"" he said. Amnesty International, after initially accepting the accounts, said last April that upon visiting Kuwait to interview doctors and inspect cemeteries, its investigators ""found no reliable evidence"" to support the accounts. U.S. Names 2 Doctors Mr. Gnehm's cable named two doctors and a nurse who gave embassy officials detailed first-hand accounts of Iraqis killing babies at two hospitals. The State Department asked that the names of these witnesses be kept private. The cable also cited corroborating testimony from ambulance and cemetery workers who told of handling the remains of scores of infants. The cable reported eyewitness accounts of two incidents in which eight babies died. A health worker at Al-Adan Hospital, the cable said, recounted arguing with Iraqi soldiers who demanded that babies be removed from incubators and respirators. One baby died ""almost immediately"" and four died within 24 hours, according to this account. Two health workers at Al-Jahra Hospital, the cable said, reported that an Iraqi military doctor had ordered 12 babies removed from the neonatal intensive care unit on Aug. 26. Eight were removed from incubators and two from ventilators. Two died that day and another later, it said. But Mr. Roth said that Middle East Watch had interviewed about two dozen health professionals who had worked in all of Kuwait's maternity hospitals throughout the occupation, and that despite many second-hand reports, ""no one we spoke to was able to confirm any instance in which the Iraqis had taken incubators or left babies to die."" He said the human rights group had not talked to the three medical workers mentioned in Mr. Gnemh's cable. Ambassador Gnemh said the embassy was told that approximately 250 babies might have been buried in mass graves at Al-Riqqa cemetery in Kuwait in August and September 1990. Mr. Roth sharply disputed this, saying that Middle East Watch investigators had thoroughly examined the records at Al-Riqqa, which appear to have been meticulously kept."
