"For the second time this year, Western human rights monitors have accused the Egyptian police of torturing political detainees. A 40-page report published in London today by Amnesty International accused the authorities of jailing thousands of opponents in recent years and inflicting torture ranging from beatings to threats of sexual abuse. The findings echo a United States Congressional report earlier this year that said that, while democratic liberties are wider than they were, torture ''continues to be practiced by police and security officials and punishment of such action is is very rare.'' Egypt, a principal diplomatic ally of the United States in the slow moving quest for a Middle East peace settlement, receives around $2.3 billion a year in American military and economic aid. Ministry Denies Findings The Interior Ministry here said the Amnesty International findings were not true. ''There is no torture of any kind in Egyptian prisons,'' a Ministry official said, declining to be identified by name. ''Up until now, no case of alleged torture has been proved,'' the official said. But he acknowledged that 900 of an estimated 1,500 people who were detained recently after clashes between the police and Islamic fundamentalists were still being held. The detentions, the official said, had been carried out ''according to emergency law after the police had definite information on terrorist plans they intended to execute.'' The Amnesty International report said the organization - which has accused Egyptian officials of using torture in earlier assessments - was concerned about the possible ill-treatement of the detainees. The Amnesty report said: ''The torture testimony has been consistent and prompts the conclusion that there is a pattern of torture in Egypt and that there are insufficient safeguards to protect detainees.'' It said the assessment was based on interviews with former detainees conducted during visits by Amnesty representatives in December 1987 and March 1988. Egypt has been ruled by emergency law for much of the last 40 years, according to the Congressional report. Amnesty quoted ex-detainees as saying torture methods included beating with whips and burning with cigarettes. Some had said they were suspended by the wrists with their hands tied together behind their backs."
