"A new human-rights monitoring group, Middle East Watch, assailed the Government of Iraq today for what the group termed ruthless suppression of dissent, apparently seeking to counter Baghdad's assertions that it has entered a period of liberalization in the aftermath of the Iran-Iraq war. In a report published today, the New York-based group concludes that the Iraqi Government ''denies its citizens virtually all basic rights and ruthlessly suppresses even the small gesture of dissent.'' The organization said that among the abuses it documented were ''forced relocation and deportation, arbitrary arrest and detention, torture, disappearance, and summary and political execution.'' The organization describes itself as a nongovernment group linked with other human rights groups that form Human Rights Watch, set up in 1987. It said it was not able to visit Iraq to substantiate its findings, which were based on ''scores of interviews in the United States and Europe with Iraqi emigres, Western diplomats and journalists, and others who have spent time in Iraq.'' The publication of the report coincides with Iraqi statements suggesting that greater political freedoms are being permitted in a country long viewed as one of the most repressive in the Middle East. Recently, President Saddam Hussein said a new constitution was being prepared to enhance freedoms. The Iraqi authorities offered no immediate comment on the Middle East Watch report, which called Iraq ''a well-organized police state'' and ''one of the most brutal and repressive regimes in power today.'' The report took exception to policies of both the Reagan and Bush Administrations, saying that they put ''the nurturing of new, friendly relations with the Iraqi Government well ahead of human rights considerations.'' Criticism of the U.S.  Despite Iraq's use of chemical weapons and its human rights abuses, the report said, the United States resumed credit guarantees to Iraq for the purchase of American agricultural products. ''The Bush Administration has given only lukewarm support to Western efforts to condemn Iraqi abuses before the U.N. Human Rights Commission,'' it said. ''Today most observers of the Iraqi scene judge the repression to have been so successful that, outside the Kurdish areas, virtually no known opposition remains,'' the report said. Iraq has a Kurdish minority whose numbers are disputed but are generally reckoned by Western diplomats in Baghdad to account for about one-fifth of a population estimated at 16 million. For decades, Baghdad has sought to crush Kurdish dissent and, after a cease-fire stilled the Iran-Iraq war in August 1988, the Iraqi Govenment was widely accused of using chemical warfare to quell Kurdish revolt, a charge Baghdad denied. Iraq has been accused of severe human rights abuses for years and has generally sought to deny widespread assertions that it is a state run by secret police agencies loyal to President Hussein. 'Public Relations Effort' The report said that, in addition to denials, Baghdad had also sought to ''obscure its violations'' through ''secrecy, initimdation, false and misleading claims, lobbying in international fora and a public relations effort in the United States tutored by hired advocates and abetted by a growing business lobby.'' The report is available for $15 from Human Rights Watch, 485 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017."
