"To the Editor: ""Torturing Children in Turkey"" by Lois Whitman (Op-Ed, Jan. 3) harshly criticizes Turkey's human rights record. Those who know Turkey must be appalled by its preconceptions and grave errors. Contrary to Ms. Whitman, Turkey is a fully functioning democracy with a parliamentary system based on the rule of law, the only preponderantly Muslim country where democracy has flourished. The state is secular and has been from the outset. Freedom of the press is fully guaranteed. Turkish democracy serves as a genuine model for countries seeking to develop a pluralistic political system. Successive Turkish governments have dedicated themselves to human rights reform. The coalition government formed following recent general elections, with the strongest public mandate of any government in the last 11 years, has declared that further reforms will be made in all legal documents to meet international standards. This will broaden the democratic atmosphere at all levels. As an example, one of the first actions taken by Turkey's recently elected Prime Minister was to shut down a prison facility because of inadequate safeguards against brutality. Turkey has established a human rights commission and a cabinet-level official to monitor human rights. Turkey does not ignore instances of torture. The Government stringently investigates all such accusations. All Turkish citizens have the right to petition the competent Turkish authority with complaints of torture or ill treatment, and everyone has the right of appeal. If a plaintiff is not satisfied with a decision at the national level, he or she can refer the complaint to the European courts or to the United Nations Committee Against Torture. Ms. Whitman mentions none of this. The international community and the news media should not ignore or belittle the radical reforms Turkey has undertaken. These efforts have the best chance of succeeding if they are widely recognized and encouraged. I must add that Turkey takes no offense from well-intentioned constructive criticism. NUZHET KANDEMIR Ambassador of Turkey Washington, Jan. 17, 1992"
