"To the Editor: ''Iran Squirms on Human Rights'' (editorial, March 10) unjustifiably, and without evidence, downgrades the recent United Nations report on human rights in Iran. I agree that the mullahs tried to manipulate the United Nations investigator and that the report gives them the benefit of the doubt and is circumspect in nature. However, the report's bias is that it does not give the mullahs quite the credit they deserve! It takes no account (and I say this conscious of blasphemy) of the continuing atrocities of the People's Mujahedeen, the leftist opposition group, who are partly to blame for the vicious cycle of violence in Iran and who have lost legitimacy in Iran by becoming an arm of the Iraqi war machine. In all fairness, the reigning mullahs are in their right to ask the United Nations and Amnesty International to take the opposition violence into consideration. The suggestion that a more balanced view is represented by the State Department's annual report ignores that this report's blanket rejection of the slightest hints of human rights improvement by the post-Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini rulers is itself very biased. For instance, it condemns Iranians for flogging, yet overlooks the same practices in other Persian Gulf countries such as Saudi Arabia. Both reports share the narrow-mindedness characteristic of coverage of Iran by the United States news media: they neglect to mention improvements by the mullahs of socioeconomic rights through establishment of a haphazard welfare state. Even politically, the ruling mullahs have improved the Iranian people's right of national sovereignty, a hard-won fruit of the revolution. This is not to whitewash their cowardly and inhumane executions and tortures. Still, there are real signs that institutional violence has been declining, many political prisoners have been freed, and the situation of prisons has improved. Iran today, far from being a ''hermetically intolerant society,'' has lately become more and more tolerant: last year, several dozen groups and parties registered for the presidential race; even though they were not allowed to participate, their mere daring is a sign of both the informal, semiofficially tolerated existence of these groups and the vibrance of Iran's civil society. Add to this that in today's Iran there is very little book censorship. Aside from People's Mujahedeen-type literature, almost all kinds of political books can be found in Teheran's bookstores. There is no free press, but the more than 130 newspapers and magazines printed evince a degree of limited pluralism never witnessed during the Shah's days. The debates in the Majlis, or parliament, are also more free-spirited than before the revolution. Is it too apologetic to suggest that the revolution's exceptional circumstances have been partly to blame for the transgression of rights? Or that for too long the United States news media have been an uncritical sounding board for People's Mujahedeenist views and have presented a lopsided image of the mullahs as barbaric rulers of an Eastern reign of terror? The time has come to amend that image, to unearth the hidden aspects of development of rights in today's Iran. I agree with you that the international heat must be kept on Iran to clean up its acts; repeating standard cliches does not help, though. In this light, the United Nations report is a shortsighted, though welcome, new assessment. KAVEH L. AFRASIABI   Cambridge, Mass., March 10, 1990 The writer is a postdoctoral fellow in political science at Harvard."
