"The Government acknowledged today that 15 people had died of torture since the military takeover on Sept.12, 1980, adding that other reports were being investigated. The Government spokesman, Ilhan Oztrak, announced that nine security officials had been convicted and sentenced in three of the torture cases and that 12 other cases were before the courts. He did not say what the sentences were. His statement came in response to reports from Amnesty International, the London-based human rights organization, that more than 70 people had died of torture under the military Government. ''The Government of the Turkish republic has never approved of the practice of torture on persons under custody and examines any denunciations and complaints in the most serious manner,'' Minister of State Oztrak declared. Without condoning torture, the Government spokesman said that an average of 22 people a day were killed by terrorists before the military takeover and that peace had now been restored. After taking power, the military began a vigorous drive against terrorism, detaining more than 100,000 people. Turkey Reacts to Report There have been frequent complaints of ill-treatment of prisoners by security officials. It was recently reported that investigations were under way into charges of torture involving 244 people. The Amnesty International reports have not been published here but have been referred to widely in official reactions. The military went so far as to take Turkish journalists into prisons and let them talk to people who Amnesty International said had been tortured. In presenting its report last September, Amnesty International said there were allegations that 62 people had died of torture. Later it listed 17 more people it said had been tortured. Mr. Oztrak said investigations into some of the Amnesty cases showed that 15 had nothing to do with torture. He said another 15 of the charges of deaths by torture were true and that the cases had been taken to court. He said 8 of the people listed had not been taken into custody, 4 were under arrest but alive, 3 were killed in fights with other opponents of the Government and 3 were killed in clashes with the security forces. Investigation is continuing in other cases."
