"To the Editor: Turkey's granting refuge to some 60,000 Iraqi Kurds, a step you praise (''To Build on a Good Deed in Turkey,'' editorial, Sept. 20), should have prompted a reassessment of the worn and wrong-headed notions you have occasionally voiced about Turkey in the past but which instead your editorial reiterated. To set the record straight: Turkey is a democratic country. Its membership in the various European democratic institutions constitutes a compelling expression by Western European democracies that they view this as an unassailable fact. The Turkish Government signed and ratified the European Convention against torture, thus allowing international inspection of all its prisons. This shows the openness and firmness of our policy against torture. Citizens of Turkey from all regions and backgrounds are represented in Parliament by deputies chosen in free and open elections. Issues concerning all citizens are addressed by their elected representatives, as well as by the free press, which reflects a wide spectrum of political views. Your editorial was particularly astonishing for its contextless, inexplicable call for Turkey to ''acknowledge'' the ''massacre'' of Armenians 70 years ago. Turkey has never denied that Armenians perished, some from the armed hostilities, others from consequent disease and famine, and some in remote parts of the Ottoman Empire from intercommunal violence following the Armenian uprising in 1915. This violence was initiated by Armenians who sought to impose an exclusively Armenian state on a non-Armenian majority population in collaboration with czarist Russia, with which the Ottomans were then at war. What we Turks object to is the characterization of the tragedies of that period as one-sided massacres or mass extermination. Any portrayal that focuses exclusively on Armenian suffering while ignoring that a large number of Turks were killed by Armenians in the civil war represents a selective approach to human suffering SUKRU ELEKDAG Ambassador of the Turkish Republic   Washington, Sept. 21, 1988"
