"To the Editor: Certainly, Israel should not be free from criticism, but Jimmy Carter in his April 1 letter (''In Working for Mideast Peace, Fairness Is Vital'') continues to equate Israel with brutal, despotic countries, thus demonstrating further how he does not understand fairness. He says he spoke ''forcefully'' on human rights abuse in Syria, as well as other countries. Strangely, what he said in those countries has not been widely reported, if at all, and is not evident in his letter. And what of the results of his speaking forcefully? Strangely again, he doesn't tell us how many documented cases of human rights abuse he presented to President Hafez al-Assad as he did to Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir. He doesn't quote any Syrian leader comparable to Shmuel Goren who could assure him that the Syrian Government was not only changing its offending politics but was actually reversing them. He did not hold a press conference at a Syrian airport to announce the successful talks. Why not? I hope that by now Mr. Carter has read Alan Cowell's highly informative ''Trouble in Damascus'' (The New York Times Magazine, April 1), which begins by describing how President Assad had 35,000 fellow Syrians killed in Hama in 1982. The article also notes that in Syria ''the freedom of travel does not apply to the country's dwindling community of Jews, who are forced to post a bond to secure an exit visa and may not travel as an entire family.'' Mr. Cowell comments, ''They are in effect, hostages.'' Is it fair for Mr. Carter to be outraged that Palestinian mothers and children were deported to Jordan (where one would like to assume they were treated as well as the Jewish refugees that come to Israel for freedom) and to say nothing publicly of Jews living in Syria who are not permitted to leave the oppression of an Arab state? Did Mr. Carter hand President Assad the names of all the Jews who wished to leave, but are not allowed to? Has Mr. Assad reversed his policies as a result of Mr. Carter's discussions with him? Perhaps Mr. Carter does not see that he is using a double standard in judging Israel and the Arab countries, expecting more from Israel as a Western country with Western values. If this is so, if he expects more from Israel and less from Arab countries, what is Israel to think of him as a negotiator? DOROTHY STEARN   New York, April 12, 1990"
