"Rebel in America.  By Celia Morris Eckhardt.  Illustrated. 337 pp. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $22.50. TO her enemies, she was the ''Red Harlot of Infidelity,'' whose ideas, if put into practice, would turn the world into ''one vast immeasurable brothel.'' To her admirers, she was a bold apostle of liberation and equality in an age of prudish sexual mores, widening class division and slavery. Few women in 19th-century America simultaneously aroused such fierce hatred and such passionate respect as the Scottish-born crusader Fanny Wright (1795-1852). Now that the firestorm of controversy surrounding her is a distant cultural memory and women's liberation is a fact of life, a judicious and well-informed biographer like Celia Morris Eckhardt can see Fanny Wright for what she was - a pioneering social activist and an eloquent freethinker whose life is a study in constantly frustrated humanitarian ideals. Born in Dundee, Scotland, and orphaned before she was 3, Frances Wright was raised first by a wealthy British aunt whose conservatism repelled her and then by an intellectual Scottish uncle whose libertarianism helped foster her radical views. When she was 22, she and her sister Camilla made the first of several extended visits to the United States. Drawn to a nation whose egalitarian principles corresponded to her own, she wrote a book, ''Views of Society and Manners in America,'' in which she contrasted the republicanism of the United States with what she saw as the aristocratic and corrupt institutions of England. Nevertheless, she did perceive alarming evidence of social injustice in America, and, believing that Americans would be naturally responsive to progressive ideas, she made this country the principal area for her activity on behalf of slaves, women and the poor. Mrs. Eckhardt, a former magazine editor now working in women's studies, points out that Fanny Wright can be credited with some important ''firsts.'' In 1825 she became the first woman in America to act publicly to oppose slavery: In the wilderness town of Nashoba, Tenn., she established a commune whose purpose was to demonstrate how slaves might be educated and responsibly freed. In 1828 she became the first woman in this country to speak to a large secular audience of men and women, and the first to argue that ''women were men's equals and must be granted equal roles in David S. Reynolds , who is Visiting Associate Professor of American Literature at Barnard College, is the author of ''Faith in Fiction'' and ''George Lippard.'' all the business of public life.'' Along with the utopian socialist Robert Dale Owen, she edited a liberal weekly newspaper, The Free Inquirer, and involved herself in the beginnings of the labor movement in New York. At the height of her success (1820-1830) she delivered many radical lectures before packed houses throughout the United States. Given these accomplishments, it is understandable that John Stuart Mill called her one of the most important women of her day, and that she received warm praise from such diverse luminaries as Thomas Jefferson, Jeremy Bentham, the Marquis de Lafayette, Mary Shelley and Walt Whitman. But the story Mrs. Eckhardt tells is hardly one of success and fruition. While Fanny Wright saw herself as the champion of rationality and peace, almost from the start she was regarded as the breeder of anarchy, atheism and free love. Regarding sexual passion as the ''noblest of human passions,'' she imagined an ideal society in which ''affection shall form the only marriage tie.'' She went so far as to call religion ''the perverter of human virtue.'' In the 1820's and 30's, the heyday of puritanical reform, such statements provoked angry responses from preachers and conservative newspaper editors, particularly because she was suspected of having illicit affairs. Mrs. Eckhardt, who appears to have read widely in newspapers of the day, is particularly effective in describing the storm of protest that Wright's attitudes aroused. Wright's endorsement of miscegenation provoked one editor to complain that she was advocating ''sensuality in its most loathsome form.'' And later praise of her antislavery efforts was drowned out by outcries against her ''licentiousness.'' When she lectured against Christianity, she was branded ''a crazy atheistical woman.'' Being the radical everyone loved to hate was at first bracing for the feisty Wright. A tall, commanding woman with a dynamic presence, she capitalized on her notoriety by lambasting clergymen and capitalists before raucous audiences titillated by press reports of her shocking notions. But Mrs. Eckhardt shows that in time the barrage of stinging invective, combined with severe personal misfortune, drove Wright into embittered isolation. The Nashoba experiment failed as a result of internal bickering and external criticism. At the same time, Wright's personal life began to fall apart. In 1829 she discovered that she was pregnant by a fellow reformer, William S. Phiquepal. She returned to Europe and secretly gave birth to a daughter. Despite her deepening frustrations, during the last two decades of her life she doggedly persisted in her support of radical causes. She divided her time between Europe and America, writing a long treatise on the history of revolutions, ''England the Civilizer'' (1848), which Mrs. Eckhardt identifies as her major work. She and Phiquepal had been married in 1831, but for long periods they lived separately and the marriage was increasingly unhappy. The last 10 years of her life were darkened by a series of nervous breakdowns and legal battles against her husband over property and over custody of their daughter. Ironically, the conservative Sylva turned against her mother and denounced her after her death. Mrs. Eckhardt's biography makes a good story as well as good history. Besides drawing a moving portrait of Wright's stormy career, she vividly sketches the social and political background of this remarkable woman. However, Mrs. Eckhardt occasionally makes naive generalizations about American culture. To accentuate Wright's rebelliousness, she frequently relies on the old theory that in the 19th century America celebrated piety, intellectual inferiority, passivity, delicacy and meekness in women. Recent historians have shown that in fact America celebrated woman's piety often, her intellectual inferiority usually, but her passivity and fragility only rarely. This was, after all, the era of Susan B. Anthony, Dorothea Dix, Lucretia Mott and scores of energetic women novelists - not to mention Fanny Wright herself. Mrs. Eckhardt's book would also have been strengthened by a fuller discussion of Wright's place in the history of radical thought. The causes Wright championed - feminism, labor reform, free thought, antislavery and ''free love'' - all have long and colorful histories, and Mrs. Eckhardt might have compared more fully Wright's theories with and those of other noted progressives like Thomas Paine and Mary Wollstonecraft. Still, this book is more reliable than the two previous modern biographies of Wright. It is a lively, readable narrative, informative to general readers and scholars alike. In its closely documented pages, one of the boldest and most iconoclastic women in Jacksonian America lives again.B"
