"Scientists said today that they had been able to verify that Iraq used chemical weapons against the Kurds more than four years ago through analyzing soil samples, a technique that could prove useful in enforcing a new international chemical weapons treaty. Scientists working with human rights groups said that, using advanced chemical analysis, they had found residues of mustard and nerve gases used against a Kurdish village in northern Iraq in 1988, an action the Iraqi Government continues to deny. Eric Stover, executive director of Physicians for Human Rights, a Boston-based group that investigates human rights violations, and others said at a news briefing here that poison gases do not survive long in the environment and that physical evidence of their use is often gone within weeks. A Search for Byproducts However, by using advanced analytical techniques that looked for minute byproducts of the chemical weapons in soil, scientists said they were able to find conclusive evidence that the chemicals were used. They said their tests confirmed the use of mustard gas, a blistering agent that burns the skin and mucous membranes, and a nerve gas called sarin, which can cause convulsions and death by suffocation. ""This is the first time ever that scientists had been able to prove the use of chemical weapons, and especially a nerve gas, through the analysis of environmental residue taken years after such an attack occurred,"" Mr. Stover said. Human rights advocates recalled widespread reports that Iraq had used chemical weapons against the Kurds. And they said that substantial indirect evidence, like the medical examination of victims and descriptions of attacks, had indicated that President Saddam Hussein had used the chemicals. Iraq threatened to use chemical agents during the Persian Gulf war, but did not do so. Later, international inspectors found both mustard gas and nerve agents, but they did not discover large stocks of the chemicals. Useful for Enforcement The technology used in the new tests could bolster a treaty signed in January by 120 nations -- including the United States and Russia, but not Iraq -- that would ban the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons, they said. Alastair Hay, a senior lecturer in chemical pathology at the University of Leeds, in England, who is a consultant to Physicians for Human Rights, said that nerve gas and mustard agents are quickly scattered by wind, sunlight and rain. However, when a forensic team representing the physicians group and Human Rights Watch, a New York-based group, visited the village of Birjinni last year, it took samples of soil from bomb craters and graves. The scientists went to Birjinni after witnesses said that Iraqi warplanes dropped three clusters with four bombs each there on Aug. 25, 1988, reportedly killing at least four people. Villagers desribed signs of a gas attack, the scientists said. The soil and other samples were sent to the British defense ministry's Chemical and Biological Defense Establishment and an analysis found minute traces of breakdown byproducts of mustard gas and sarin, the groups said. These residues of the breakdown of these poisons are so specific, Mr. Hay said, that they provide a unique chemical ""fingerprint"" that could only result from a poison gas attack."
