"The creation of a ""no-fly zone"" over southern Iraq by the United States and its allies last week was ostensibly aimed at preventing President Saddam Hussein from continuing to terrorize and slaughter the region's large, dissident Shiite Muslim population in the name of quelling its persistent, if ineffectual insurgency. But it also signaled the start of a reversal of Administration policy toward Iraq, which has failed in its implicit goal of ousting Mr. Hussein. After 18 months of studiously ignoring, first, Mr. Hussein's brutal crushing of the March 1991 Shiite uprising after the Persian Gulf war and more recently, Iraq's repression of the southern Shiites, the Bush Administration is sending condolences to the victims. Though the new policy, in which President Bush demanded that Iraq halt all flights over the 47,500 square miles of southern Iraq, was praised by many analysts and quickly endorsed by Gov. Bill Clinton of Arkansas, its timing prompted questions about political motivation, a suggestion that Mr. Bush and his team heatedly denied last week. Nevertheless, said the Middle East expert Fouad Ajami, who supports the thrust of the new policy, the Administration's ""election-eve conversion"" made such suspicions unavoidable. Clearly there are new circumstances. Mr. Hussein only began using fixed-wing aircraft in raids against the Shiites in April. A United Nations report detailing Iraq's human rights abuses of the Shiites was presented only on Aug. 11. And only in recent months has Iraq increased harassment of United Nations inspectors, human rights monitors and relief workers. Moreover, officials note, the Western and Arab coalition authorized by the United Nations to oust Iraqi forces from Kuwait lacked a specific mandate to protect Iraqi minorities until April 1991, when Mr. Hussein's savage repression of the Iraqi Kurds prompted the Security Council to approve Resolution 688. By then the Shiite uprising in the south had already been put down. Finally, they say, the Administration needed time to mobilize logistical support for a joint response, and above all, time to determine that such action would not jeopardize the Arab-Israeli peace talks under way in Washington. Those talks are widely seen as the most impressive byproduct of the gulf confrontation. Yitzhak Rabin's election victory over the intransigent Likud Government insured that the talks would progress, as, indeed, they have. Fears of Dismemberment Only a year ago, the White House accepted Arab warnings that the creation of a no-fly zone would lead to the effective partition of Iraq, a prospect anathema to Sunni Arabs, the Shiites' bitter historical rivals, and who have traditionally relied on Iraq to counter militantly Shiite Iran. The dismemberment of Iraq, in turn, could lead either to the creation of a Shiite Islamic enclave in southern Iraq, or even worse, they feared, to Iranian influence or domination there. For far too long, officials now acknowledge, they believed that Mr. Hussein would be ousted by the Sunni military men who surround him. Critics, like Laurie Mylroie, a fellow at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, argued futilely that the Iraqi Shiites were nationalists, and that they probably lacked the political cohesion needed to form a separate state. The Iraqi opposition, even those based in Iran, were committed to keeping Iraq intact. But fear of Islamic fundamentalism and of Iran led to inaction. United States officials calculated that it was better to risk keeping a de-fanged Hussein in power than to risk dismembering Iraq. Now, officials conclude, that assessment was wrong. Perhaps, paradoxically, it was the Kurdish and Shiite rebellions just after the war that led Sunni military officers to rally to Mr. Hussein, but the Iraqi leader has not become more vulnerable. Even worse in an election year, his taunting of United Nations inspectors reminds Americans that he is still around. The value of getting rid of him increased as pro-Clinton bumper stickers began appearing on the cars of unemployed auto workers -- ""Saddam Hussein Has a Job. Do You?"" The Latest 'Ism' The evolution of Administration thinking about militant Islamic fundamentalism also played into the reassessment. In a speech in June outlining Administration policy, Edward P. Djerejian, an Assistant Secretary of State, stressed that America would not seek to portray Islam as the latest ""ism"" to be fought -- a natural successor to the cold war which in the 1960's prompted the United States, Saudi Arabia and even Israel to support militantly Islamic groups as a bulwark against Godless communism, the same groups that now threaten American interests in the region. Washington, Mr. Djerejian said, has no quarrel with the great Muslim religion, but rather with those who use religious cover to espouse extremism, violence, intolerance and terrorism, and who use democracy to gain power and destroy democracy. In an interview last week he named some culprits: the Shiite group Hezbollah in Lebanon, Sunni Muslim Hamas in the Israeli-occupied territories, and the Governments of Sudan, and, of course, Iran. Yet despite the Administration's obvious antipathy to Iran's support for Hezbollah, its fears of Iran's designs on southern Iraq (which Iranian officials adamantly deny), Washington, he said, is prepared to engage in a ""dialogue"" with Iran. It is Iran that has refused to talk. Absent such a dialogue, the perceived threat of Iranian meddling in southern Iraq has not changed dramatically. And the Administration is obviously still concerned about what might happen there should Baghdad lose effective sovereignty. Administration officials, for example, are known to oppose sending arms and aid to the Iraqi Shiites to fight Saddam by creating an Iraqi Shiite mujahedeen, as they did in Afghanistan. But absent such support, Ms. Mylroie says, Hussein will cling to power. The Administration, she argues, still has no actual strategy for getting rid of him if he does not rise to this provocation. ""What we've had,"" she says, ""is a tactical shift when a strategic one is required."" Nevertheless, the shift reflects a marked change in priorities. Whatever risks inherent in the no-fly zone are now outweighed by the dangers of doing nothing to try to hasten Mr. Hussein's ouster. The Administration's fear of Islamic fundamentalism, justified or not, has taken second place to Mr. Bush's need to appear a man of action. The Administration has found a new, if temporary ""ism"" to oppose in the Middle East -- Saddam has replaced the Red Menace."
