"Human rights are in a ""perilous state"" under Palestinian self-rule, threatening the prospects for regional peace, the United States-based Human Rights Watch/Middle East said today. In a 50-page report, the monitoring group accused Yasir Arafat's police force in the Gaza Strip of arbitrarily rounding up political opponents and mistreating some of them. Press freedoms have also been violated, it said, and the Palestinian Authority, which administers self-rule, has failed in its first nine months to show ""a commitment to installing a rule of law."" The study broke little new ground, for most of its findings had already been reported by foreign news organizations. Nonetheless, it was the first full assessment of the authority's performance by an international group, and it was important also because charges of human-rights violations were long a basic component of Palestinian resistance to Israeli occupation of Gaza and the West Bank. ""The perilous state of human rights in the Palestinian self-rule areas poses a grave threat to the prospects for a durable peace in the region,"" Human Rights Watch said in a separate statement. It was referring to conditions both in Gaza and the autonomous West Bank district of Jericho, but its main focus was on the crowded, poverty-ridden coastal strip, where Mr. Arafat has put his headquarters. An Arafat spokesman, Nabil Abu Irdeineh, waved off the report as ""inaccurate"" and said it was ""done in a short time,"" but he did not specify what errors he saw in it. Mr. Abu Irdeineh added that ""the Palestinian Authority is still in the beginning of its rule"" and is ""serious about implementing law and order in Gaza and Jericho."" Human Rights Watch did not spare Israel in its study, pointing out that it remains the occupying power throughout most of the territories. In particular, the group denounced Israel for the border closings it periodically imposes on the West Bank and Gaza, including one ordered after a Palestinian suicide bombing that killed 21 Israelis on Jan. 22. Such restrictions, which keep tens of thousands of Palestinians from low-paying jobs in Israel, amount to collective punishment and have ""devastating effects"" on the territories' fragile economy, the report said. As the latest border closing entered its fourth week, the Israeli Government announced that it would be continued for at least seven more days, making it one of the longest bans ever imposed on Palestinian entry into Israel. Environment Minister Yossi Sarid said Israel had ""solid information about possible terror events"" expected in the days leading up to Feb. 25, the first anniversary of the massacre in which a Jewish settler killed 29 Muslim worshipers in the West Bank town of Hebron. No ""responsible person"" could lift the ban this week, Mr. Sarid said. But Israeli officials acknowledge that the restrictions are inflicting serious harm. For instance, Gaza is reported to have only a two-day supply of gasoline left. Israeli fuel deliverers stopped going there after a security guard accompanying a truck convoy was killed by Palestinian gunmen. In its report, Human Rights Watch devoted a good deal of attention to Palestinian police roundups of Islamic militants and others opposed to Mr. Arafat. These sweeps have usually followed assaults on Israeli targets, and almost invariably those arrested are released after several days. Nearly all, the study said, ""appear to have been targeted for their suspected political affiliations rather than because they were accused of direct involvement in the attacks."" Most of the political targets are not mistreated, the report said, but some prisoners, especially those accused of collaborating with Israel, have been beaten. Two men have died in custody."
