"A NEW prison drama opened here recently to a packed house, and by the time the premiere performance ended, more than a few of the spectators were in tears as they stood to applaud. At one point in the play the lead character, a blind and bearded chain-smoker, says to a fellow inmate, ""Sometimes I wonder whether the people doing this to us are human or whether they are totally oblivious to the people around them."" ""Whatever they do,"" his friend replies, ""it's fear that makes them do it."" The play is remarkable not just for its trenchant treatment of human rights issues, but because it was written by the lawyer and social critic Esber Yagmurdereli, who happens to be a blind and bearded chain-smoker with long experience in Turkish prisons. Mr. Yagmurdereli was recently sentenced to another long jail term, but he was released after a wave of foreign and domestic criticism. For years a faceless prisoner, Mr. Yagmurdereli has suddenly become the most prominent figure in the human rights firmament here. In a situation that recalls the more highly publicized experiences of China's dissidents, his case reflects some of the contradictions of Turkish politics. Western governments criticize rights abuses in Turkey, but continue selling weapons to the security forces. Critics openly damn the regime, but are often brought to trial for doing so. Prisoners, including those convicted of aiding terrorism, are freed when foreign pressure demands it. Mr. Yagmurdereli's release, for example, came as the European Union was reviewing Turkey's application for membership and as Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz was preparing to visit Germany and the United States. Officials said they were releasing him because he was in poor health, but as he walked out of jail he told reporters, ""I have not been given a medical examination as far as I know."" ""What I want is that my ideas be regarded as true or false, rather than as useful or harmful,"" he said. ""Expression of one's thoughts is still an offense in Turkey. My release in this way does not mean the problem has been eliminated, and I will continue my struggle to resolve this problem as long as it exists."" Singled Out In Turkey as in other countries where human rights are at issue, protesters and their foreign supporters have always found it useful to single out a figure who crystallizes the debate. Journalists concerned about press restrictions here picked the jailed editor Ocak Isik Yurtcu last summer, and soon after they began organizing international protests on his behalf, he was released. Campaigners against jailhouse torture have seized on the cases of Metin Goktepe, a journalist who died in police custody in 1996. In Washington, pro-Kurdish activists are staging a hunger strike not just for Kurds in general, but specifically to win the freedom of a prominent Kurdish firebrand, Leyla Zana, a member of the Turkish Parliament who was stripped of her seat in 1994 and then jailed on charges of supporting terrorism. Mr. Yagmurdereli, who lost his sight as a child, was sentenced to death in 1978 after being convicted of directing a terrorist cell. His sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment, which in Turkey is equivalent to 35 years. He served more than 13 years, seven of them in solitary confinement, before being paroled in 1991. Although terms of his parole meant that he would have to serve the remainder of his sentence if he committed another crime, he nonetheless threw himself back into political activity. He helped form a left-leaning party and organized a campaign to gather one million signatures protesting the war against Kurdish separatists in southeast Turkey. Inevitably the justice system finally caught up with Mr. Yagmurdereli again. He was convicted of encouraging separatism and sentenced to a year in prison, plus the nearly 22 years remaining on his previous life sentence. He had served just three weeks when the Government bowed to foreign pressure earlier this month and suspended his sentence for one year, a highly unusual if not unique maneuver. Turkish rightists were furious. ""Yagmurdereli is a sheer terrorist, not a human rights figure or anything like that,"" said Altemur Kilic, a conservative politician and columnist. ""The Government is showing its weakness by releasing him."" Turkey is in a unique position among the world's human rights violators. In many ways it is a free and open society. It considers itself pro-Western and is a valued member of the NATO alliance. Precisely these aspects of Turkish society encourage writers, politicians, and journalists to challenge the state in ways that would be unthinkable in Iran or Iraq, Burma or Belarus, Cuba or Kenya, Syria or Sudan. Location, Location But in doing so, they confront a power structure that fears that open discussion of issues like Kurdish identity will encourage separatist terrorism. Like many of Turkey's problems, the human rights dilemma has its roots in the Kurdish southeast. Military commanders and their civilian supporters insist there can be no serious change in military and police tactics, or in laws restricting freedom of speech, until the war there is over. But the war itself is fueled by resentment over those tactics and laws. Although European countries have condemned Turkey's human rights record, its strategy in the southeast and specifically its imprisonment of Mr. Yagmurdereli, the United States has been more cautious. A strong coalition in Washington, led by powerful Greek, Armenian and pro-Kurdish lobbies, presses for action against Turkey, but successive administrations have blocked it on the grounds that Turkey's strategic position is too valuable. Turkish human rights leaders are not impressed when foreign governments urge Turkey to improve its human rights record, and they were unmoved by German, French and British appeals on behalf of Mr. Yagmurdereli. ""As long as these countries sell weapons to Turkey, they don't have the right to say anything about human rights here,"" said Nadire Mater, who has been active in many human rights campaigns. ""These public statements are like a game. A government says something or makes some protest, but at the same time these governments are selling weapons which are used to carry out the violations. That is not being serious."""
