"Since the Muslim clerics who now rule most of Afghanistan issued their decree last week forbidding women to work, a 34-year-old physician has walked to the clinic she runs in one of Kabul's poorest districts, just as she has for years, except that now she does so in fear of a beating, imprisonment or worse. After 18 years of war, dreams of a better future evaporated for the physician at dusk on Thursday of last week, when the Taliban militia overran Kabul and proclaimed a Muslim fundamentalist state. ""I cannot see any hope,"" she said today, glancing repeatedly toward the curtain leading from the one-room clinic out into the dusty street, concerned that her discussion with two Western reporters might be interrupted at any moment by the militia. ""When I look around me now, I can see nothing but a new calamity, a life of further misery on top of everything else we have suffered."" The Taliban seem determined to enforce their Islamic social code even if it means further lowering the dismal standards of health care available to thousands of ill and disabled Afghans. Although some female doctors and nurses have been exempted from the decree, most have not, and most have stayed home. Taliban rule has filled the streets of this largely ruined city with thousands of illiterate village youths toting Kalashnikov rifles. As all opposition disappeared with the retreating forces of the defeated Government, many of the fighters have little to do but enforce the new Islamic decrees. One day this week, Taliban youths took sticks to three women in the street outside the Jamhuriyet hospital because their ankles showed beneath their head-to-foot shrouds, which women are required to wear outside their homes. According to a doctor who said he had been a witness, the women took the beating, with two small children howling at their sides, then fled into the crowds that are beginning to return to the capital's streets. About the same time, several miles away in the western districts of the city, Taliban fighters lounging on metal chairs outside the ruins of the old Soviet cultural center sprang to life upon seeing a battered taxi carrying Westerners. They reached into the glove compartment and triumphantly seized an audio tape, convinced that it carried recorded music, also banned. When the driver invited the fighters to put the tape into the taxi's cassette player and it turned out to be a recitation of verses from the Koran, the youths looked crestfallen and waved the taxi on. To describe this as a ""reign of terror,"" as the human rights organization Amnesty International did in a report earlier this week, may be an exaggeration. Although the secretive Taliban make it impossible to be sure, there is no evidence yet that they have killed or even seriously wounded anybody in Kabul since Friday. On that day they burst into a United Nations compound and seized the former Communist president, Najibullah, and his brother, executing them and stringing them up in a public square. But there is no escaping the fear and anger that the Taliban have stirred among many of Kabul's million people, especially among women and girls, who have been forbidden to go to their offices and schools. A senior Taliban official said on Tuesday that these bans would be revoked when provisions consistent with ""Muslim principles"" could be made for female workers and students. But many Kabul women know that in other cities taken by the Taliban, women are still waiting for similar promises made during the past two years to be acted upon. Already, the effects of the ban have been drastic. At the Jamhuriyet hospital, a dingy institution overwhelmed by war casualties, dozens of female doctors and nurses last appeared for work on Friday, the day before the Taliban decrees were issued. On Wednesday, the only working women visible on the hospital's second floor were two cleaners. The situation was only slightly better at the Wazir Akbar Khan hospital, one of the most up-to-date in the city. Dr. Abdul Samad, the hospital's medical director, said that he had made a deal with the Taliban's new health minister, a Muslim cleric named Massoumi Afghan, that five of the 35 female doctors and nurses could work each day. Like almost everybody willing to speak about the Taliban, Dr. Samad said that the restrictions imposed by the new decrees were a small price to pay for the peace that their victory had secured. But he made it plain that he, like many other professional people, is hoping that the Taliban will relent on the strictures as soon as the flush of victory is past. ""Now that they have brought an end to the fighting,"" he said, ""I hope the Taliban will turn their attention to these problems."" For many Kabul women, almost any delay will be too long. The city is filled with widows, disabled men and orphans, and many women are the sole supporters of families, sometimes of extended families. According to an official of the Swiss-based International Committee of the Red Cross, Thomas Gurtner, his organization alone provides food supplements to 15,000 women who head families, most of whom had jobs until last week. Mr. Gurtner said many of these women were supporting seven or eight people, mostly children. ""They are desperate,"" he said. At an emergency meeting today, foreign relief organizations that assist more than half the city's population debated ways of persuading the Taliban to lift the ban. In addition to depriving women of income, it has severely curtailed many relief activities that depend on trained women. One of the organizations represented at the meeting, Oxfam International, has been forced to close down programs under which it is teaching women and children to avoid the estimated 10 million land mines spread around Afghanistan during the war. When the ruling council announced the decrees, some relief workers suggested that programs be suspended as a means of forcing the lifting of the ban. But at the meeting today, a wait-and-see policy was adopted. ""I think we must just assume that we can change these things through dialogue,"" said Charles MacFadden, executive director of the Agency Coordinating Body for Afghan Relief, a private group. Mr. MacFadden said that Taliban clerics had proved flexible in Kandahar, the southern city where the Taliban movement has its religious headquarters, and that there was at least a chance they would prove even more flexible in Kabul, which has always been more modern in its social outlook than Kandahar. ""The Taliban have made some valid points,"" he said, ""and I think we have to listen to them."" One of these, Mr. MacFadden noted, is that many soldiers from rural areas have never seen an unshrouded woman other than their mother or sisters. ""The Taliban say they have to be strict,"" he said, ""at least until they can get some of these fighters out of Kabul and back to their homes."" But the physician who continues to run her private clinic in defiance of Taliban orders said that all hopes for progress would be dashed. The Taliban, she said, represent a culture that has not changed in Afghanistan in centuries, and they will not relent because foreign relief agencies press them. ""It is so sad, and so demoralizing,"" said the physician, who insisted that she not be identified. ""In Russia and the United States, women are being launched into space, but here in Afghanistan, women are being told that they have no place but in the home. It is a primitive thing."""
