"Middle East Watch, a human rights group, has charged that wide-ranging reforms instituted by Saudi Arabia in the wake of the Persian Gulf war fall far short of internationally recognized standards in basic civil and political rights. A report by the group, a division of the New York-based Human Rights Watch, says the reforms, ostensibly intended to decentralize power in the kingdom and to guarantee Saudi citizens personal freedoms, actually serve to concentrate power in the hands of King Fahd and are ""either silent or tentative on the most universally recognized human rights."" The new laws do not specifically ban extrajudicial killings, torture or cruel or inhuman punishment, which have occurred in the past, the report asserts. Nor do they protect free speech, assembly or association, all of which are restricted in the kingdom. The centerpiece of the program was the creation of a Consultative Council that is to confer with and advise the Cabinet and to propose and review laws. The 60 council members, who are to be appointed by the King and serve for a four-year term at his pleasure, are to be named by September. The reforms also established a bill of rights for the first time and revised the way the King is chosen. Reforms Called 'Empty' The study, entitled ""Empty Reforms, Saudi Arabia's New Basic Laws,"" was written by Aziz Abu-Hamad, a Saudi analyst who is a senior researcher at Middle East Watch. It is the first in-depth independent analysis of the reforms announced by Saudi Arabia in March. The changes were prompted by longstanding demands from middle-class businessmen and technocrats who have pressed for modernization of the 60-year-old country, liberalization of its political system and laws, and more political participation in decision-making. At the time of the reforms, President Bush applauded them in a letter to King Fahd. Senior American officials, as well as foreign diplomats in Riyadh, the Saudi capital, described the new laws as important steps toward participatory government and recognition of citizens' rights. But the reforms, the report says, provide neither for democracy nor elections. Quoting extensively from King Fahd's recent speeches, the monitoring group said the reforms strengthen the King's already near-absolute power and fail to provide for meaningful popular participation in government or for public scrutiny of government decisions. A spokesman for the privately financed Middle East Watch said that a copy of the report had been sent for comment to Prince Bandar bin Sultan, Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to the United States, at least two weeks ago, but that no response had been received.  Prince Bandar has been out of the country for several weeks. The Saudi Embassy had no comment. Law on Home Search Cited The study asserts that sections of the new Basic Law of Government, which appear to be liberalizations of previous Saudi policy, are actually restatements of past policy, or so vague as to be meaningless. For instance, Article 37 says: ""Private homes have sanctity. They cannot be entered without permission of the owners or searched except according to law."" The report says that for this provision to be meaningful, there must be a law requiring safeguards against arbitrary searches. But it adds, ""There is no requirement under the Imprisonment and Detention Law of 1978, or any other law, that searches are conducted after securing a warrant from a responsible authority."" The report also criticizes the lack of a prohibition against torture or the mistreatment of prisoners. ""Despite royal orders instructing detention authorities not to torture prisoners,"" it says, ""there were numerous reports in 1991 of torture in Saudi detention facilities, especially those run by the secret and religious police."" It cites a State Department report on human rights for 1991, which says the department has received ""credible reports of injuries and the deaths of at least two, and possibly more, persons caused by beatings or the use of excessive force while being held in official custody."""
