"An outspoken Palestinian critic of human rights violations by the Palestinian Authority was detained for 24 hours and then released late tonight by Palestinian security forces in the West Bank town of Ramallah. The Palestinian, Bassem Eid, lives in Jerusalem and works as an investigator for the Israeli human rights group, B'Tselem. He is also a representative of the Paris-based media group, Reporters Without Borders. His arrest followed a pattern of similar detentions in recent months of several Palestinian journalists and human rights advocates, and it raised concerns that the authority was trying to intimidate critics before planned Palestinian elections. Mr. Eid was freed after a flurry of contacts throughout the day in which the authority came under pressure from Israeli Cabinet ministers, foreign diplomats and human rights groups at home and abroad. Shortly after he was freed, Mr. Eid said he had spent the day in a room near the offices of one of the branches of the Palestinian security force. He was neither questioned nor told why he was there, he said. Mr. Eid was released to Dr. Ahmad Tibi, an Israeli Arab adviser to Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization. Mr. Eid had been arrested on Tuesday night after he left his house in the Shuafat refugee camp on the outskirts of Jerusalem, apparently to help resolve a dispute between neighbors. As he was driving home, Mr. Eid said, he was stopped by a Palestinian officer who told him to follow him to Ramallah, a city under Palestinian rule about eight miles north of Jerusalem. Throughout the day, Palestinian officials denied that Mr. Eid was in their hands. ""We don't have him,"" said Col. Yunis al-Asi, the commander of Palestinian security forces in the Ramallah area. ""There is no warrant for the arrest of Bassem Eid."" Nabil Abu Rdeineh, Mr. Arafat's spokesman, said: ""The President does not know anything about this, and he has nothing to do with this case. If there is a security problem, this has nothing to do with the President."" But Yizhar Beer, director of B'Tselem, said Mr. Eid had been targeted because of his harsh criticism of the authority's human rights record. Mr. Eid researched a B'Tselem report published last year that documented torture, abduction and other abuses by the Palestinian Protective Security Service, based in the self-rule enclave of Jericho. The head of the service, Jibril Rajoub, subsequently accused Mr. Eid of being a ""cheap informer"" for Israel, a charge Mr. Eid said endangered his life. Last week, Mr. Eid investigated and publicized the six-day detention of a Palestinian editor who failed to print a story flattering to Mr. Arafat on the front page of his newspaper. Speaking on Palestinian radio this week, Mr. Eid said broadcasts had failed to provide equal time to independent and opposition candidates in the Palestinian elections. Mr. Beer said the detention of Mr. Eid, who holds an Israeli identification card because he lives in Israeli-ruled East Jerusalem, violated the accord on Palestinian self-rule."
