"To the Editor: The human rights picture that Ismail Khelil, the Tunisian Ambassador, paints in ""Tunisia Acts Justly on Fundamentalists""(letter, Feb. 22) is rosy, in stark contrast to real human rights conditions in Tunisia. Mr. Khelil states that his Government in dealing with the country's opposition has always acted ""in conformity with the law and with the aim of protecting society and preserving the rights and the physical and moral integrity of those accused."" In our March report on Tunisia, Amnesty International states that there have been thousands of arrests of suspected members or sympathizers of the Islamic opposition movement, al-Nahda. Paradoxically, though al-Nahda is portrayed by Mr. Khelil as ""fringe,"" the arrests have been sweeping and span the social spectrum, including children in secondary school, students, teachers, professionals and workers. Detainees have been held in long-term incommunicado detention, and denied access to lawyers and their families. The police have falsified dates of arrest, illegally prolonging detention. There have been allegations of torture in police and national guard stations throughout the country, and numerous reports of torture carried out even in the building of the Ministry of the Interior. Deaths of those in custody have occurred under suspicious circumstances. Government officials have lied about the cause of death. In one case, officials stated that a 25-year-old student had died in a car accident. The autopsy report indicated the cause of death was ""the forceful insertion of a foreign object at least 6 inches into the anus."" Marks all over the body indicated he had been subjected to torture. Mr. Khelil presents an optimistic view of improvement since President Zine al-Abidine Ben Ali's ascendancy in 1987. He cites as examples new laws on political parties, which secure freedom of association, the ""organization of police custody and pretrial detention,"" the ""protection of human rights,"" the existence of an Amnesty International chapter in Tunis and ratification of international human-rights conventions. Unfortunately, these changes are constructed largely of rhetoric, rather than action. The Amnesty chapter in Tunis has been subject to Government harassment for a year. The Amnesty section director was recently interrogated more than two hours by police officers. Amnesty publications have been held up at customs, and all copies of the Amnesty International 1991 report were impounded by the police. Copies were taken from local bookstores, and bookstore owners were questioned about purchasers of the report. Tunisia has failed to put in law or practice most of the international standards to which it is a party. Unless the Tunisian Government takes steps to end abusive practices and implement new laws, Mr. Khelil's picture will bear no likeness to the reality in Tunisia. JACK HEALEY Executive Director, Amnesty International USA New York, March 5, 1992"
