"Plenty can be done about Libya's Colonel Qaddafi beyond raging in frustration at his hospitality toward terrorism. There are clear, specific acts that victimized countries can take in retaliation. Even while weighing the more complex questions of economic warfare, they can deny landing rights to Libyan aircraft; boycott the Tripoli airport; close Libya's embassies, and monitor all bearers of Libyan passports. But none of these steps will be imposed without American leadership. By repeated deeds and words, Colonel Qaddafi has made Libya an outlaw state. In London, one of his ''diplomats'' murdered a British policewoman. In Cairo, his hired gunmen were caught attempting to kill a Libyan exile. In Malta, hijackers almost certainly based in Libya were responsible for the death of 60 on an Egyptian airliner. And last week, in Rome and Vienna, 19 were killed and more than 110 wounded in airport massacres that Libya's official news agency initially extolled as ''heroic.'' A surviving assailant is said to claim that similar attacks are planned for Paris and Madrid. In Brussels, police have seized a cache of weapons meant to kill more air passengers. Colonel Qaddafi now theatens to kill more Americans ''in their own streets'' should the United States retaliate. He vows permanent war against planes and ships in the Mediterranean should any nation do to Libya what it routinely does to others -violate its sovereignty. In this, Colonel Qaddafi is less a revolutionary than a throwback. For centuries the Barbary states - Morocco, Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli - seized ships and took captives for ransom. Thomas Jefferson sent warships to Tripoli in the early 1800's to foil this form of state terrorism. Eventually, maritime nations approved conventions to make such piracy a crime punishable by any state, whatever the flag of a seized ship. The same principles now apply to air travel. Accords requiring the prosecution and extradition of air hijackers were adopted in Tokyo in 1963, in The Hague in 1970 and Montreal in 1971. These have been reinforced in successive United Nations declarations, including the recent Security Council resolution that unanimously condemns hostage-taking and obliges all states to deny sanctuary to terrorists. Alas, these assertions of law lack enforcement mechanisms. America has thus far found no response to its repeated appeals for collective action against states that shelter hijackers. France, West Germany and even victimized Italy and Austria condemn Colonel Qaddafi, but remain bound to Libya by lucrative trade. It's like paying tribute money to the latest Barbary pirate. Colonel Qaddafi's present weakness makes this capitulation especially frustrating. The global oil glut dilutes his oil weapon, and as Libya's earnings have slumped so has his popularity at home. He has estranged most of his Arab and African friends, and even the Soviet Union has treated him warily though it provides him weapons. It would cost nothing for Italy and Austria, whose attempts to befriend Libya were repaid by massacre, to join the United States and Britain in closing Libya's embassies. And it would cost little to blacklist Libyan airports and airliners, and to scrutinize those carrying Libyan passports. Checking suspect passports has already netted suspicious characters in Italy; security agencies lag shamefully in pooling intelligence. There is less hope for stronger sanctions, like a trade embargo of the sort already imposed by the United States, because of fears that competitors will rush in to capitalize on the vacuum. Notwithstanding, the United States should press for such sanctions. A few more airport outrages may finally change European minds about the price of appeasement. Only by raising the costs of outlaw behavior can the civilized world begin to prevent its spread."
