"Three Iranians described today what they said was their torture at the hands of Revolutionary Guards and prison personnel in Iran. They said they were tortured because they were sympathizers of the Mujahedeen Khalq, an Islamic socialist movement now based in Paris. One Iranian, Hossein Dadkhah, took off his shoes and socks to show how some of his toes had been cut off. Another, Narges Shayesteh, showed scars from cigarette burns. And Majgan Homayounfar, confined to a wheelchair, said her leg had been cut off below the knee with a machete. At a news conference here, the three said they wanted to draw attention to the ''inhumanity of Khomeini's regime'' at a time when the General Assembly is debating a report on human rights in Iran. All three said they escaped from Iran with the help of Mujahedeen resistance cells still operating there. Several months ago, Mr. Dakhah and Miss Homayounfar were interviewed by Andres Aguilar, a Venezuelan who prepared the human rights report on Iran for the United Nations. The Mujahedeen, which led guerrilla activities against the Shah and supported Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini before the revolution, turned against the Khomeini regime when Mujahedeen activities were banned. Miss Homayounfar, 24 years old, a mathematics teacher, said that after she was arrested in September 1981, she was taken to a remote area of Teheran and beaten until she fell unconscious. When she awoke, she said, she recognized one of her captors, who cut off her leg with a machete, drove a car over her other leg and left her for dead. Mrs. Shayesteh, 27, also a high school teacher, said she was arrested for selling Mujahedeen publications at her bookstore. Mr. Dadkhah, a 29-year-old electrical engineering student from Isfahan, said he was arrested in December 1982, stripped and beaten. ---- Walters Praises the Agenda UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Dec. 4 -Vernon A. Walters, the United States delegate, today called the human rights agenda of the General Assembly a ''new beginning'' and urged the adoption of resolutions criticizing rights violations in Afghanistan and Iran. The resolutions are the first on human rights in those countries to be considered since the Iranian revolution and the intervention in Afghanistan by Soviet troops in 1979."
