"President Saddam Hussein has now succeeded in draining about 40 percent of the fresh water marshlands of southern Iraq so his military forces can press their campaign against dissident Shiite Muslims there, a United Nations human rights inspector reported today. Max van der Stoel, a former Dutch Foreign Minister, said the Iraqi Government's systematic draining of the southern marshes around the confluence of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, so that its forces can penetrate and drive out the so-called Marsh Arabs from their traditional homes, was ""a serious human rights violation against the people of the region."" Mr. van der Stoel, who was banned from visiting Iraq and has had to rely on reports from refugees and dissidents, called for the United Nations to station permanent human rights monitors in Iraq, especially in the marshes. His report to the General Assembly today came as Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister, Tariq Aziz, began talks with the United Nations on his country's compliance with disarmament requirements imposed by the Security Council after the Persian Gulf war. Soil Samples Taken It also came after United Nations arms inspectors yesterday removed samples of soil, water and vegetation for analysis from a site in the southern marshes where fleeing Shiite Muslims have accused the Iraqi forces of using chemical weapons against them during an attack in late September. The report on Iraq's human rights record was one of several released today charging serious human rights abuses by Sudan, Myanmar, Iran, Cuba, Haiti, Afghanistan, El Salvador and the former Yugoslavia -- the largest number of countries ever accused of such violations at a session of the General Assembly. The United States and other Western countries are pressing for the creation of the post of High Commissioner for Human Rights. In the report on Sudan, the United Nations investigator, Gaspar Biro, accused the Government of Lieut. Gen. Omar Hassan el-Bashir of ""grave violations of human rights"" including ""large numbers of extrajudicial killings, summary executions, enforced or involuntary disappearances, systematic torture and widespread arbitrary arrest of suspected opponents."" The report said the Sudan Peoples Liberation Army, a rebel group that has been fighting for decades against northern Muslim control of the Christian and animist south, was also guilty of serious abuses.  R.A.F. Jet Crashes in Iraq LONDON, Nov. 23 (AP) A Royal Air Force Harrier fighter jet crashed early today while patroling the no-flight zone over northern Iraq, the Ministry of Defense said. A spokesman said that the crash had been caused by mechanical problems and that the pilot ejected with only minor injuries. A United States rescue aircraft picked up the pilot less than 100 miles from the Turkish border in the Kurdish region of northern Iraq."
