"In an interview at The New York Times, Zazi Sadou spoke through a translator about the nightmare in her homeland -- the murderous rampages in the name of God, the violent attacks on teachers and students and artists and intellectuals, and especially the horrendous ways in which women have been targeted, how they are raped and maimed and casually killed, or kidnapped and forced into sexual servitude. Ms. Sadou is a feminist and veteran journalist in Algeria, a country that for the past several years has been soaked in the blood of innocents sacrificed by religious and political zealots, assorted crazed criminals and maniacal believers in masculine supremacy. An estimated 60,000 people, many of them women and children, have been killed in armed clashes and outright massacres since the military Government voided elections in 1992 that probably would have been won by militant Islamic fundamentalists. Prevented from attaining power by the ballot, the fundamentalists have attempted to seize it through terror. ""The violence has been so barbaric, so extensive, so extreme,"" said Ms. Sadou, ""that it is taking the shape of genocide. These are crimes against humanity. And we need to hear, from everywhere, the firm condemnation of those who are responsible."" At least 98 people and perhaps as many as 300 were slaughtered in August when members of the Armed Islamic Group, equipped with shotguns, knives, swords and axes, invaded the village of Rais, which is just south of Algiers. Witnesses said the majority of the panicked victims were women and children. Many of the bodies were burned and some were decapitated. In some cases, the heads of victims were left on doorsteps. The massacre was not an isolated occurrence. On Sept. 22 more than 400 people were slaughtered, again by members of the Armed Islamic Group, during an attack on the village of Bin Talha, which is also south of Algiers, in an area that has come to be known as the Triangle of Death. Ms. Sadou noted that it is typical in such attacks for attractive young women and girls to be kidnapped for sexual purposes, and then killed later. When the attackers left Rais they took nearly three dozen women and girls with them. An unknown number were taken from Bin Talha. ""In these attacks you might have 100 or 150 terrorists and they would divide up the tasks,"" Ms. Sadou said. ""One group would do the killing, the beheading. Another would choose the most beautiful women to take with them. And a third group would be outside waiting for anybody who tried to flee the village."" The extreme oppression of women and girls -- including widespread public humiliation, maiming and killing -- has been a cornerstone of Islamist terror in Algeria for many years. Even before the aborted election, members of Islamic militias and other militant groups would torment and sometimes kill women who refused to wear the traditional veil. Women perceived to be living in ""immoral"" circumstances were also subject to savage punishment. And there were several cases of girls whose skirts were considered too short having their legs burned with acid. ""Women are seen as devils,"" Ms. Sadou said. ""We are the permanent enemies."" A recent A.P. story began: ""Eight men who were apparently Muslim militants descended on a village school in Algeria over the weekend, shooting or slashing to death 11 female teachers and a male instructor who tried to stop the killings as students watched, witnesses said today."" The main political party of the Islamic militants is the Islamic Salvation Front (or F.I.S., its French acronym). It has been weakened in its struggle with the Government over the past five years and many analysts now see it as a moderating force. But Ms. Sadou warned that the F.I.S. has long been inextricably entwined with the most murderous elements in Algeria (including the Armed Islamic Group), that it has not backed away from its profoundly destructive beliefs regarding women and girls and that it has never favored a democratic form of government. The situation in Algeria needs to be seen for what it really is. The atrocities are, indeed, crimes against humanity -- in other words, crimes against the whole world. It would behoove the rest of the world to pay closer attention."
