"International At least 45 Indians were killed and 150 were wounded in a series of attacks and bombings by Sikh extremists, officials announced. They said the attacks occurred in buses, a train and crowded neighborhoods in New Delhi and three northern states. The authorities called out the Indian Army to patrol sensitive areas of the capital. [Page 1, Column 4.] New efforts to capture Josef Mengele were set. The United States, West Germany and Israel vowed to improve communications at both the investigative and prosecutorial levels with the aim of bringing the Nazi death camp doctor to trial for ''crimes against humanity.'' [1:1.] George P. Shultz, in Jerusalem, laid a wreath at Israel's memorial to the six million Jews killed by the Nazis. The Secretary of State declared that ''Israel is the true witness to the Holocaust and the truest symbol of the victory of good over evil.'' [7:1-2.] President Reagan returned home from a 10-day European trip, urging ''significant reductions in nuclear arms.'' Mr. Reagan asserted there was considerable evidence that Moscow was not abiding by the 1979 strategic arms limitation treaty and said that Washington might not extend its observance of the unratified pact. [1:2-3.] Warsaw accused Washington and other Western Governments of sponsoring political subversion in Poland. The charges were made in Parliament by the Interior Minister, Gen. Czeslaw Kiszczak. [3:4-6.] National President Reagan defended his shift on the 1986 military budget. He said he had agreed to limit the military spending increase to the inflation rate after receiving a Senate pledge that he could seek additional money if he found the budget cuts were harming the national security. Last week, Mr. Reagan said that passing such a military budget would be ''irresponsible.'' [1:6.] The President hailed the budget accord worked out in the Senate as an important signal to financial markets. Mr. Reagan agreed to a one-year freeze in cost-of-living increases for Social Security beneficiaries because the Administration was unable to muster enough votes to continue the benefits next year. [10:1-3.] Vietnam veterans accused of crimes have often argued that they should not be held accountable for them because of profound psychological scars they suffered from the fighting. The defense has proved successful for some Vietnam veterans, but it has divided judges, psychiatrists and the veterans themselves, and it has encountered increasing resistance from juries. [1:3-5.] Conservative rabbis indicated anger at 51 members of Israel's Parliament that voted in January in support of proposed changes in the Israeli law of return that would have ruled only Orthodox conversions to Judaism valid for those seeking to enter Israel as Jews. The proposals were defeated, but the Conservative Rabbinical Assembly announced that the 51 legislators, including Ariel Sharon and Yitzhak Shamir, were no longer welcome as speakers or honorees at the 850 Conservative congregations in the United States. [9:6.] Party switches in Massachusetts are uncommon in a state that has long been heavily Democratic. Nonetheless, two prominent former Democrats and a current one, former Governor Edward J. King, may run as Republicans in next year's elections for the three top statewide offices. The two other possible candidates, who changed their party registration last year, are L. Joyce Hampers, a former state Revenue Commissioner, and Edward Harrington, a former United States Attorney. [8:1-3.] Lawyers for Claus von Bulow lost their effort to dismiss one of two assault charges against him, but they won their struggle to permit a Newport (R.I.) Hospital doctor to tell the jury that lack of oxygen rather than an insulin injection caused Mr. von Bulow's wife, Martha, to suffer a first coma in 1979. [8:4-5.] Metropolitan Favoring New York grapes is unfair, according to a Federal appeals court that struck down the state law authorizing the sale of wine coolers in state supermarkets and grocery stores only if they were made with New York State grapes. The court upheld a lower Federal court ruling that held that the state law unconstitutionally discriminated against similar products from other states. [1:5.] A widening of the Jersey Turnpike is scheduled for the 35-mile-stretch between New Brunswick and the northern end of the toll road. Turnpike officials said the more than $1 billion project was scheduled to be completed by 1991. [27:1.] A state prison will not be built in New York City, the Cuomo administration announced. Officials said that the cost of constructing a maximum-security prison in the city was too high and that they would look for a site elsewhere in the state. [28:1-2.] Mother's Day generates frenzy in Manhattan's flower district, centered on 28th Street between Broadway and Seventh Avenue, and for the people who work there. The tribute tomorrow, maybe the biggest flower-giving day of the year, brings in multimillion dollars in sales for the longtime flower dealers. [1-2.]"
