"With the rise in political violence, which is taking 12 to 15 lives each day, there is growing concern in Turkey over the preservation of human rights. Protests by some Turkish lawyers, physicians, politicians and educators have focused on what they say is the increasing use of harsh treatment by security forces trying to control political extremists. Attilla Sav, president of the Turkish Bar Association, has accused the authorities of failing to act to end abuses by security forces and ''even finding excuses for them.'' The association recently presented a report to the Government on the dangers faced by lawyers, poor conditions in prisons, curbs on the right of defense and widespread complaints of brutality. Beatings and torture were said to have resulted in at least two deaths since the beginning of the year. Amnesty International, the London-based human rights organization, has issued a report accusing the Turkish police and martial law authorities of using ''widespread and systematic torture'' against political detainees. 'Turkey Is an Open Country' Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel dismissed the charges and emphasized that ''Turkey is an open country.'' Mr. Demirel's Minister of State, Orhan Eren, categorically denied that torture was used in Turkey. He insisted that there was no evidence to substantiate the accusations, which he said were based on ''rumors from abroad.'' The Interior Ministry, in a statement last week in response to Amnesty International's charges, said Turkey was ''one of the rare countries which truly respects human rights.'' It said Turkey was determined to fight against terrorism ''without deviating from the principles of a democratic state,'' and said any claims of constitutional violations would be sent immediately to independent judicial bodies. U.S. Calls Rights Record Good ''Torture, such as that alleged, is clearly against the law in Turkey and it is not condoned by the Government,'' a United States Embassy spokesman said. ''While incidents may take place, and frankly in view of the level and intensity of terrorist activities this is hardly surprising, Turkey has a good human rights record. In the last two years about 3,000 people have been killed here by terrorists, including eight Americans.'' The American official stressed that both the Social Democratic Government of former Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit and the conservative Government of Prime Minister Demirel ''have worked hard to preserve Turkey's democratic institutions and human rights in the face of the terrorist challenge.'' Although it is generally agreed that democratic safeguards are preventing systematic abuses of human rights at this time, abuses are multiplying and could become a real threat. ''It cannot be said that the use of torture is systematic,'' said Mumtaz Soysal, a human rights activist.  ''Nothing is systematic here. But there has been an increase in police brutality in the last two or three months because the authorities have been unable to put an end to terrorism.'' Mr. Soysal, a professor of political science at Ankara University, said the Demirel Government won October's elections largely on a lawand-order platform that accused former Prime Minister Ecevit of failing to deal firmly with terrorism and showing sympathy for leftwing extremists. 'Unacceptable Methods' ''Now the security forces are under strong pressure to do something and as a consequence sometimes use unacceptable methods and arrest innocent people,'' said Mr. Soysal, a political columnist for the independent daily Milliyet. He pointed out a positive development in recent weeks: The martial law commanders in Istanbul and Ankara have ordered investigations into the most serious complaints of torture and illegal treatment.  The authorities are investigating allegations of torture in four recent cases that ended in death. In Ankara the martial law command is looking into the case of a trade unionist, Yasar Gundogdu, who died April 19 from a head wound while in the custody of security forces. In Istanbul the martial law authorites have asked for an autopsy report on Mehmet Osman Onsoy, an Istanbul University graduate who died while in custody May 22. A medical report two days before he died mentioned wounds from a sharp cutting instrument. In Malatya, the martial law command announced last week that it had begun investigating the death of Ali Karasu, who died in the city's central police station. Eight policemen went on trial last week before martial law courts in Erzurum, Kars and Agri in northeastern Turkey in connection with the death of Oruc Korkmaz, a prisoner said to have died from head injuries. The martial law authorities are also investigating a number of complaints about brutal treatment. The assistant principal of Ankara's Kurtulus Lycee, Mustafa Nayir, charged that he was beaten by three security officials with the butt of a pistol.  Two of his alleged assailants have been identified. The Amnesty International report cites the case of a 17-year-old high school girl who said she was taken to Ankara police headquarters and interrogated for two days. She said she was given electric shocks and that she was tied to a wooden cross on the wall. After talks with a number of Turkish rights leaders, journalists, lawyers, educators and former political prisoners, it appears that the situation in Turkey cannot be compared to Iran under Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi or Chile under Gen. Augusto Pinochet. A more apt comparison would be Northern Ireland, where all sides use rough methods. It can also be said from the conversations that cruel treatment is not official policy but is practiced by lower-echelon policemen and to a lesser degree by the military. The methods used are fairly simple, such as beatings on the soles of feet with a falanga, a stick that leaves few traces. Once a preliminary investigation is completed - 48 hours for normal cases and up to 15 days for ''collective offenses'' under martial law - a prisoner has a reasonable chance of getting a fair legal defense from a judiciary that is known to be independent and just."
