"A bizarre ruckus occurred at the United Nations when leaders of the Afghanistan resistance came to speak at a recent correspondents' lunch. They were attacked and pummeled by ''diplomats'' representing the Kabul regime, which owes its survival to the presence of 120,000 Soviet troops. The episode raises an interesting question: By what right does Kabul speak for Afghanistan in the General Assembly in the first place? There's a powerful case in logic, justice and precedent for seating the Afghan resistance. Consider the parallel with another invaded country, Cambodia. For a decade the General Assembly has rejected the claims of the regime implanted by the Vietnamese and instead has recognized a resistance coalition whose incongruous partners include the neutralist former chief of state, Prince Sihanouk, and the mass-murdering Khmer Rouge. The Afghan resistance speaks for more people and controls more Afghan territory than the Kabul regime. Since the Soviet invasion in December 1979, Afghans have voted with their feet against Kabul; a fourth of the country's 16 million inhabitants are now refugees in Pakistan and Iran. Although Kabul controls the cities, the insurgents rule most of the countryside. And no less important, despite lopsided U.N. votes condemning the invasion, the Soviet Union still refuses to fix a reasonable timetable on withdrawing its troops. The atrocious human rights record of the Soviet occupiers and their Afghan proxies should also weigh heavily. A devastating report by the Human Rights Commission is being debated this week by the General Assembly. The report documents indiscriminate bombing, torture of prisoners, use of booby-trapped toys to maim children and denial of social and economic rights. It also offers this relevant judgment on the resistance: ''It would seem that these opposition movements command the support of the vast majority of the population.'' Commendably, the U.N. is no longer ingloriously mute concerning human rights outrages perpetrated by Communist regimes. An appropriate way to hold Kabul accountable for its crimes is to award Afghanistan's U.N. seat to the legitimate resistance claimants. The prospect of a vote on that may powerfully concentrate Soviet attention on ending a barbarous occupation."
