"Despite steps taken by the Turkish Government to stop human rights abuses, violations of citizens' liberties still continue, according to a 1987 report issued last week by the Helsinki Watch Committee. The committee, which monitors compliance with the 1975 Helsinki accords, said that although citizens are now allowed access to human rights groups and there is greater freedom of the press, torture is still ''routinely practiced'' in police detention. ''Our expectations for continued human rights progress in Turkey have not yet been fulfilled,'' the committee concluded in the 158-page report. The Turkish Embassy, in a statement Friday in Washington, described the report as ''overwhelmed by a mass of misinformation, misinterpretation and omission of material facts.'' Turks are to decide in a parliamentary election today whether to keep the Government of Prime Minister Turgut Ozal. A referendum passed in September, which allows previously banned politicians to take part, is one change hailed by Helsinki Watch. ''There have been noticeable changes,'' the executive director of Helskinki Watch, Jeri Laber, said in a telephone interview. ''What hasn't happened is that violations have not been eliminated. There's been a lot of talk and very little implementation.'' The report was based on interviews with 100 Turks in June. Among significant changes is a ''kind of glasnost in the press, and greater freedom to criticize human rights abuses,'' said Ms. Lauber, one of the report's authors. But some reporters and politicians have been prosecuted for their opinions, it said. The report also said that Turkey had allowed the establishment of a Human Rights Association, which is now monitoring many problems, and that citizens were allowed, with some restrictions, to file complaints with the European Commission on Human Rights. Another sign of progress has been the lifting of martial law. But despite Government assertions to the contrary, police torture is ''widespread and common,'' the report said. It said the Kurds, an ethnic minority, are severely repressed by the Government, which deprives them of their ethnic identity by forbidding their language in official settings, or the practice of their customs. In its response, the Turkish Embassy said, ''Torture of detainees is a felony crime.'' It added, ''There is no ethnic discrimination in Turkey.''"
