"The United Nations Security Council appeared close to agreement tonight on a new resolution declaring Iraq responsible for financial losses caused by its invasion of Kuwait and ordering governments to present evidence of war crimes committed by its forces there, diplomats involved in the negotiations said. This new resolution, designed to increase pressure on President Saddam Hussein to withdraw from Kuwait and focus world attention on the gulf crisis again, threatens Iraq with further punitive mesures if it refuses to obey. But it also asks the Secretary General of the United Nations to make another effort to find a peaceful solution. The emerging agreement, confirmed by American, Cuban and Malaysian diplomats, is expected to reassert the Security Council's unity in the crisis by bridging a potentially serious split that had developed between some of its 15 members. Led by the United States and Britain, the five permanent Council members with veto powers wanted a tough new resolution calling on all countries to draw up financial claims against Iraq and collect evidence of human rights violations. The three other permanent members with veto powers are the Soviet Union, France and China. But four of the nonaligned members -- Columbia, Cuba, Malaysia and Yemen -- favored a more moderate approach, a resolution merely asking the Secretary General to use his ""good offices"" to promote ""a peaceful solution"" to the gulf crisis. The final compromise is expected to combine both approaches, diplomats said. Negotiating Through the Night In addition, the new omnibus resolution demands an end to all hostage-taking, pillaging and looting by Iraqi forces in Kuwait. And it says that Baghdad must resupply the handful of foreign embassies still holding out there with food and water. If Iraq fails to comply, the Council threatens ""further enforcement mesures under the Charter."" Western diplomats say this can only mean a resolution invoking Article 42 of the Charter, which allows the Council to enforce its decisions by military might if it believes economic sanctions have failed. Article 41, under which the Council has already imposed such sanctions on Iraq, also allows it to sever all telecommunication links with an offending country as well as diplomatic relations. But Council members say they do not want to do this. The emerging agreement follows prolonged negotiations lasting throughout Thursday night and all of today. The Council's other nonaligned members -- Ethiopia, Ivory Coast and Zaire -- have supported the tougher permanent members' draft all along, as have the three other northern rotating members, Canada, Finland and Romania. The United States is seeking quick approval of its resolution tonight so it can refocus the Council's attthe on the gulf crisis after the two resolutions it approved earlier this month criticizing Israel over the killing of 21 Palestinians in Jerusalem on Oct. 8. Speedy Action Sought Another reason for acting speedily, diplomats say, is to keep the debate over the new gulf resolution from running into next week, when it might become intertwined with discussion of a report the Secretary General is to present on ways of safeguarding Palestinians against further Israeli violence in the occupied territories. The four dissidents include the Council's only two predominantly Muslim members and its two Latin American members. They argued that President Hussein may now be willing to compromise over Kuwait and that the Council should therefore give priority to seeking a negotiated solution. The five permanent members disagreed, saying that adopting a mild resolution now that does not put additional pressure on Baghdad will only encourage President Hussein to believe the international coalition against him is crumbling. Although they already have the nine votes needed to pass their resolution, the five are also striving to keep the Security Council as unified as possible in its approach to the gulf crisis."
