"Israel's Defense Minister, Yitzhak Rabin, bristled when a questioner asked about the treatment of Palestinians in the occupied territories and drew a parallel with South Africa. Weren't the tactics of repression in Gaza and the West Bank tearing at the fabric of Israel's own society? ''There is no parallel,'' Mr. Rabin said. There could not be, he said, because Arabs are not a majority as blacks are in South Africa. There are 3.5 million Jews and only about 2 million Arabs in Israel in the occupied territories. But of course the questioner was not raising a point of arithmetic. The point, one that concerns many Israelis today, is that ruling someone as a subject people, without political rights, requires the use of force and more force - and corrupts those who rule. Mr. Rabin was speaking at the Brookings Institution, to an audience including specialists on the Middle East. The tension in Gaza, the shooting of Palestinian demonstrators there, gave urgency to the occasion. But anyone who hoped for new light on the problem must have heard Mr. Rabin's answers with despair. Israel had three options in the occupied territories, Mr. Rabin said. One was to annex them, giving political rights in Israel to all inhabitants who wished them. The second, ''at the other extreme,'' was to withdraw unilaterally from most of the land taken in 1967. The third option, he said, the one actually followed by all Israeli Governments since 1967, was to occupy the territories militarily and leave their legal and political status open until Jordan and appropriate Palestinians were ready to negotiate. As Anwar Sadat's example had shown, only through negotiations could the Arabs get territory back from Israel. But the reality is not of a status quo carefully preserved until negotiations. Large numbers of Israelis have settled in the occupied territories, creating what the settlers call ''facts on the ground.'' Israel has taken a significant portion of the land for its own use. To the Palestinian inhabitants those are deeply disturbing developments -ones that dampen their hope of ever running their own lives. Gaza, for example, is one of the most densely populated places on earth: 650,000 Palestinians, most of them living in squalid refugee camps, on 140 sandy square miles. Yet 2,500 Jewish settlers occupy a large slice of the available land. What could be more provocative? The Arabs refused to negotiate for years, and they have themselves to blame for much of the result. But the obstacle to negotiation now is the divided Israeli Government. The United States and all other parties are ready to go to an international conference that would create a framework for negotiation. Israel's Labor Party, to which Mr. Rabin belongs, favors the conference. But the Likud Prime Minister, Yitzhak Shamir, is totally opposed. He has said that Israel's control of Gaza is ''not negotiable,'' and he feels if anything more strongly about the West Bank. So in reality a fourth option has been chosen. Israel sits on the territories, settles them, fits them into its own economy, making a negotiated change increasingly unlikely. But by saying that their legal status is still to be determined, it avoids the need to face the prospect of giving 1.5 million Palestinians political rights. The trouble is that occupation requires repression. The Gaza Palestinians have to find work in Israel, but they are not allowed to stay there overnight - just as South African blacks must go back to their townships. Some young Israeli soldiers, like some young white South Africans, are unhappy at the role of policing a people without rights. Mr. Rabin, at Brookings, kept saying that Israel used its military power in the occupied territories only to stop ''terror.'' He said that Israel would not allow people to gain political ends by ''public disorder.'' Again, the reality is otherwise. Israel has not just acted against disorder and terrorism. It has tried to suppress peaceful expression of Palestinian feelings, detaining editors and expelling elected mayors. Mr. Rabin should know that better than anyone. As Defense Minister he has been extremely harsh in the West Bank and Gaza, detaining and deporting more Palestinians than his supposedly hard-line predecessors. His Cabinet colleague, Ezer Weizman, put the truth bluntly in speaking about the Gaza disturbances. ''Whoever thinks this is a passing thing is making a very serious mistake,'' Mr. Weizman said. ''It is a result of the failure to find a political solution, and the lack of a desire even to look for one.''"
