"In seeking a Congressional forum for exposing reports of Iran's persecution of followers of the Bahai religion, Firuz Zazemzadeh turned to exactly the right man: Representative John Edward Porter. Mr. Porter, an Illinois Republican, is chairman of the Congressional Caucus on Human Rights. More significantly, Mr. Porter, a Presbyterian, has occasionally attended services at the Bahai temple in Wilmette, one of the cities in his district, and thus is well versed in the religious sect's mission. And so it is that the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Human Rights and International Organizations will hold a hearing Wednesday on a resolution, sponsored by Mr. Porter and nearly 200 other members of the House, condemning ''persecution of members of the Bahai religion in Iran.'' A Question of Danger  Before trying to air the Bahai plight, Mr. Kazemzadeh had to decide whether such public exposure might endanger the lives of Bahais living in Iran. According to reports from Iran, 18 were put to death when President Reagan appealed publicly a year ago to the Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini to spare 22 arrested members of the Bahai sect. Mr. Kazemzadeh, secretary of the National Spiritual Assembly of the Bahais of the United States, which is based in Wilmette, says he believes that appeal by President Reagan may have saved the lives of 40 to 60 other arrested believers held in the same Shiraz jail and that Congressional exposure may save still other lives. ''I concede there is no way to answer this question with any kind of certainty,'' said Mr. Kazemzadeh, who will testify at the hearing next week. ''It's like proving a negative. I personally, from what I know about the situation in Iran, would have expected that 10 times as many Bahais would have perished if we remained silent on the outside.'' An Offshoot of Islam  The Bahai religion, a century-old offshoot of Islam that had its foundation in Persia, worships two prophets who followed Mohammed. It professes equality of the sexes, universal education, elimination of world prejudice and one world government, all of which are anathema to the Islamic leaders of Iran. In a recent interview, Mr. Kazemzadeh said that today there are 1.5 million to 2 million Bahais around the world, including more than 700,000 in India, about 100,000 in the United States and 300,000 to 400,000 in Iran. In Iran, he said, Bahais are considered a heretical sect of Islam and do not receive the constitutional protection given to other religions. Churches have been closed down and Bahais who refuse to renounce their faith can lose their jobs or places at universities, and are often arrested.  The Bahais were already persecuted in prerevolutionary regimes, he said, and have come under increased repression under Ayatollah Khomeini, whose Government is said to have executed more than 170 Bahais and to have imprisoned and tortured hundreds of others since coming to power in 1979. The Power of Publicity  In response, Bahais around the world have turned to publicity, winning resolutions of support from the legislatures of Canada and the European Economic Community as well as an earlier resolution from Congress in 1982. The Bahais have also aired their grievances before the Governments of Britain, Switzerland and Australia. And the United Nations Human Rights Commission has debated the subject. ''Many people express doubts about the effectiveness of publicity,'' Mr. Kazemzadeh said. ''But I believe it is more difficult to kill, more difficult to torture in broad daylight. If that were not so, Iran would not find it necessary to hide what it is doing and to say there is no religious persecution.'' Mr. Kazemzadeh, who is a professor of Russian history at Yale, pointed to the case of the Soviet Union, where he said the Government has been inhibited in its treatment of dissidents by public pressure from abroad. But again, he conceded, even in this case there is no certain way to measure Soviet response to publicity. Anatoly B. Shcharansky, a Jewish dissenter who was the focus of intense publicity when he was convicted of treason in 1978, remains in prison and is said to be in failing health. Andrei D. Sakharov, a physicist who is the most prominent Soviet dissident, remains in internal exile in the city of Gorky despite continuing pressure from abroad. He is also said to have health problems and recently had surgery for phlebitis. ''There are certain cases where the government has to save its own face before its own public,'' Mr. Kazemzadeh said. ''It can't bow to pressure. But the question is, when three people are treated more harshly, do they at the same point treat six people less harshly? It is a question you can answer only by intuition and implication.'' Having put their faith in publicity, he said, American Bahais started a sophisticated campaign that combines demonstrations aimed at gaining local press coverage with lobbying in Washington that employs the aid of a public relations firm. ''When there are even 40 or 50 letters on a small issue, reinforced by a story in a small newspaper about a local demonstration, a congressman notices,'' Mr. Kazemzadeh said."
