"Morocco is a country where human rights violations have been commonplace and speaking against the King is a risk few dare to take. But after two decades in secret prisons in Morocco, Maria-Inan Oufkir feels that she has little to lose. Her family's name is one that people in Morocco will pronounce only in a whisper. For almost 20 years, the family was imprisoned by King Hassan II, said Miss Oufkir, a slight 32-year-old woman, who recounted their story in two interviews. Today she is free to move about Morocco, ""but the regime's repeated promises of a passport always come to nothing,"" she said as she walked the teeming streets of Rabat, glancing furtively over her shoulder, a habit born of life under constant surveillance. Her caution is not the only scar that remains. She cannot, for instance, bear to be in a closed room. ""I scream, I beat on the door, I am uncontrollable,"" she said, her eyes burning with sudden anguish. ""I cannot sleep if my bedroom windows or door are shut. I would rather be outside."" Imprisoned at Age 11 Her nightmare began at the age of 11 when she was whisked into a windowless vehicle and driven into Morocco's southern desert to a prison created especially for the wife and six children of Gen. Mohammed Oufkir. Their crime? Being part of the wrong family. General Oufkir, a former Defense Minister and long the King's closest associate, ordered the strafing of the royal Boeing by air force fighter jets on Aug. 16, 1972. The King survived. By that evening, General Oufkir was dead. By the official account, he committed suicide after accepting responsibility for the assassination plot. ""But the bullets,"" said a Western diplomat who has followed the case, ""were in General Oufkir's back and the back of his head."" In all, Western officials estimate that at least 300 and perhaps as many as 700 political opponents of the King have vanished. While no such cases were recorded over the last year, the older ones remain impenetrable. ""There has been an improvement in the past couple of years, but many questions remain unanswered,"" a diplomat said. A Problem for U.S. King Hassan's treatment of the Oufkir family, and others seen as inimical to the Government, now pose a delicate problem for the United States and other Western countries. The King's diplomatic importance has increased since the Israeli-Palestinian agreement in September, and so has the pressure to overlook the intermittent violations of human rights that have characterized his 33-year-old reign. Western diplomats say King Hassan continues to work quietly to coax Arab countries, particularly Saudi Arabia, into closer ties with Israel. Morocco, while refraining from diplomatic recognition of Israel, is extending business ties, opening telephone lines and starting flights between the two countries. Moreover, with Algeria plunged into an undeclared civil war between the military-backed Government and Islamic fundamentalists, Morocco stands as a bastion of stability for European governments anxious about a huge exodus to Europe from North Africa. Secretary of State Warren Christopher and Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel have paid calls, and the King is expected to visit Washington this year. The European Union has opened negotiations on according favorable trade status to Morocco, which has requested eventual membership in the 12-nation bloc, formerly known as the European Community. ""The Oufkir case is one where amnesia rather suits the West,"" a European diplomat said. ""There are diplomatic priorities, after all. Morocco is playing a key role in Middle East peace efforts. The country is stable and a bastion against Algerian-style fundamentalism. One must be practical."" Some Response Seen Nonetheless, the United States does try to prod Morocco on its human-rights practices. Questions are posed at the Interior Ministry; a report on abuses is prepared annually. In response, the King recently created a new post, Deputy Minister for Human Rights, albeit one widely viewed as having no budget, staff or mandate. The Taznamart prison in the Atlas mountains, long known as a center for torture, was razed last year, the Government said. The Government will not comment formally on the Oufkir case. But a senior official close to the King who insisted on anonymity said the affair was one in which King Hassan would not be swayed. ""It is inexplicable even to those who are close to him,"" he said. Gilles Perrault, a French journalist, has said the Oufkir family has been pursued with ""an inextinguishable desire for vengeance that is beyond any logic."" The persecution began on Dec. 23, 1972, when, after a few months under house arrest in Rabat, they were loaded into trucks and taken to Akka in the south. There, in a former barracks, they were held in isolation for a year. They were moved to Agdz and then Tazenakhte, near the southern town of Ouarzazate. At the second of these prisons, the family was held blindfolded for a year. ""For 15 years,"" Miss Oufkir said, ""we never saw anyone except guards with machine guns."" In 1977, they were moved to a farm converted into a prison at Bir Jdid, about 30 miles south of Casablanca, where conditions grew worse. Miss Oufkir and her three sisters shared one tiny windowless cell. They were beaten and made to clean up their own excrement. There was little food and no exercise. Both Miss Oufkir's mother, Fatima, and her brother, Raouf, attempted suicide. ""Three of us would sit in the middle of the cell and the others walk circles around them,"" Miss Oufkir said. ""We walked kilometers that way. We were close to starving, and hunger reduces you to something lower than the ground. It is a vicious state in which no human relation is possible."" Finally, in April 1987, with her weight down to 60 pounds, Miss Oufkir and three of her siblings escaped through a tunnel they had painstakingly dug. Five days later, they were arrested in Tangier. But they were able, during their brief flight, to make contact with a Paris-based lawyer, Bernard Dartevelle. ""I saw them briefly in Tangier, in a pitiable state, but was then arrested myself and thrown out of Morocco,"" Mr. Dartevelle recalled. He said he and a colleague began negotiations with the King for the family to leave to Canada. The King Reneges By October 1987, the Canadian authorities had agreed to receive the Oufkirs, money had been deposited in a Canadian bank, and a flight was prepared for Oct. 27. At the last minute, however, the King, whose power is absolute, reneged without explanation. Instead, the Oufkirs were placed under house arrest in Marrakesh, where they lived in relative comfort, until 1991, when they were released. No official declaration was made at the time of their release, just as no explanation was ever given for their captivity. Miss Oufkir's younger sister, Yasmina Soukaina, writes songs, but nobody in Morocco will sing them. Her younger brother, Abdallah, has had drug problems. Raouf, the older brother, is unemployed. Myriam, an older sister, still fights epilepsy that began in captivity. Only Malika, another older sister, has a job. All have been pressing for passports to leave. ""After 20 years of imprisonment, I cannot make my life here, let alone raise a child,"" said Mara-Inan Oufkir, who is unmarried and has adopted a two-year-old boy. Refusal Unexplained The King's refusal to let them leave remains a mystery. Mr. Dartevelle, who represents the Oufkirs, said he believes that the King is worried that the Oufkir family might know Moroccan Government secrets. Among the sensitive subjects about which Western officials believe the Oufkirs may know something are the unsolved 1965 murder in France of the Moroccan opposition leader Mehdi Ben Barka, whose body was never found, and presumed contacts between King Hassan's entourage and the Israeli secret service, the Mossad. Miss Oufkir said: ""The King is afraid we would not keep quiet. But our only desire is to lead normal lives. He has a biblical hatred for us."" As for the King, he has little to say on the case. He told French television last March that the Oufkirs were free to leave, but nothing happened. Another of his few comments, made in the 1970's, was less cryptic: ""I know what would have happened to my own children if General Oufkir had succeeded in taking my place."" Map of Morocco showing location of Rabat."
