"When Turkish soldiers came to his village last year, they gave Mehmet, a 15-year-old Kurd, and his neighbors a choice: join the Turkish Government in defending the village against Kurdish separatists or leave. It was really no choice at all. A few men earlier agreed to become ""village guards,"" armed and paid by the Government. But they suffered reprisals from the Kurdish Workers Party, a Marxist group whose 11-year-old insurgency in this barren southeastern region has put Turkey's democratic credentials to the test. And so, like thousands of other Kurdish families caught in the vicious, drawn-out war, Mehmet's family and their neighbors packed up and left. They took what they could with them, leaving the rest to be burned by the army, according to reports that reached the villagers as they made their way to a slum on the edge of this regional capital on their own, without any help from the Government that had come to save them. As the death toll climbs toward 18,000, the war has taken on ever-wider dimensions, for Turkey and for the region. Twice this year, Turkish troops have crossed into Iraq to chase Kurdish rebels and destroy bases. This fall, the Government's harsh response to the separatist threat will in effect go on trial, as the European Parliament examines Turkey's human rights record before voting in October on ratification of a customs union that has been long sought by Ankara. The war is putting enormous pressure on Turkey's idea of itself as a stable, unitary, secular country, able to withstand the winds of nationalism, Islamic fundamentalism and intolerance that continually blow around it. For some Turks, demands for greater cultural and political autonomy on behalf of Kurds, who represent one-fifth of a population of almost 60 million, amounts to a threat to the foundations of the Turkish state. For others, such issues should long ago have been divorced from the organization that espouses them. Much of southeastern Turkey -- including 10 provinces and 5.5 million people, of whom 2.5 million are Kurds -- is still a war zone, living under a state of emergency. Official statistics say 978 villages and 1,676 hamlets have been emptied during the Government's drive to make the region safe from terrorism; Government officials say 310,000 people have been displaced. Human rights groups say the number of people forced out of their homes is much greater, perhaps in the millions. But this is a murky war, in which the two sides dispute not only facts but terminology. The Government calls it a war against terrorists, while its critics say the security forces have waged war against the Kurdish population. Kurds talk about being evacuated from the villages, while officials say they left voluntarily, seeking security in larger town and cities. After a particularly violent year in which security forces claim to have killed 4,000 rebels, Turkish officials here say the Kurdish Workers Party -- or P.K.K. as it is known by its initials in Kurdish -- is in retreat. They point to a drop in the number of incidents, particularly in large town and cities. In 1994, 3,179 incidents were reported: ambushes, raids, explosions of mines planted on country roads, shootouts. The number for the first five months of this year was only 459. But military success by the Government has come at enormous cost, mainly to Turkey's image at home and abroad. Human rights groups report an increase in the number of unsolved killings, disappearances of people under detention and confessions made under torture last year. An estimated 150 people are now in Turkish jails, charged under Article 8 of a 1991 anti-terrorist law for ""damaging the integrity of the Republic of Turkey."" In some cases they did no more than express sympathy for Kurds caught in the war. Criticism of Turkey's human rights record, principally from Europe, seems to have stiffened the resolve of hard-liners in Ankara. After meeting stony resistance even within her own party, Prime Minister Tansu Ciller recently had to withdraw a ""democratization"" package pending in Parliament that would have abolished Article 8. Turkish security forces, including the army and the police, say they have killed 10,000 rebels in the last decade. They say the rebels have killed about 5,000 civilians and 3,000 members of the security forces. Human rights group here in Diyarbakir dispute these figures and any assertions that the Government can win the war in the southeast. ""The state wants to crush the entire Kurdish population, and they are not strong enough,"" said Abdullah Cager, a lawyer for local branch of the Human Rights association who spent four months in prison this year for the publication in 1992 of human rights abuses in the region. ""The people who are carrying out the struggle are the population: it is a struggle of the population itself."" Given the ban on any public expression of sympathy for the Kurdish cause, it is difficult to gauge the level of popular support for the P.K.K. Many critics of the Government say it has driven Kurds into the party's camp by banning less militant alternatives, by repressing any airing of the Kurdish issue and by only recently focusing on this region's desperate economic situation. ""It is a mistaken policy,"" said one 26-year-old Kurdish refugee living outside Diyarbakir, who would not give his name. ""If it had been the right way, the state could have eliminated the terrorist threat a long time ago."" Unal Erkan, the Governor of the region, said in political concessions, including greater freedom of expression, could not be granted until the rebel threat had been eliminated. That, he said, has begun to happen. ""We gave already brought peace to the city, towns and big villages,"" he said. ""That doesn't mean there will be no more terror, but they have lost their influence. ""Four years ago, after 4 P.M. in Diyarbakir, no one could go out in the streets at night. It was unimaginable to go to coffeehouses. There were no cultural activities, and the shops were obliged by the terrorists to close once a week."" Residents of Diyarbakir and large towns agree that the situation is less tense than it was several years ago. In some outlying regions, the Government has begun to approve applications from villagers seeking permission to return to harvest their crops or, in a few cases, to move back to their deserted villages. ""When I arrived two years ago, of 80 villages in this area there were only 10 where I could go safely, and then only with heavy security,"" said Cemal Husnu Kansiz, the state prefect in Cinar, a district in Diyarbakir Province. ""Today there are only 10 villages that are under P.K.K. control."" In the village of Bespinar, which has about 80 houses and 400 people, village leaders met three times with Mr. Kansiz and local security officials before deciding to join the Government's side in late 1993. Now, 16 men in the village act as guards, which means they receive a monthly salary of $150, a uniform and guns. ""We decided to cooperate because we understood the pressure from the P.K.K. would become worse if we stayed idle,"" said Nizamettin Celik, a farmer who wears the camouflage of a village guard. Villagers said that Kurdish guerrillas, several of them recruits from nearby villages, had started to come to Bespinar in 1991, emerging from caves in the nearby hills to collect food and and money. In one year, the villagers said, they paid the rebels 400 million turkish lire, or $10,000. ""They told us to get the money any way we could,"" Mr. Celik said. But the guerrillas also talked to the villagers about the struggle for an independent Kurdistan where Kurds would be free to express themselves, and to study in their own language. ""They said the Turkish state would go away, and that we would be treated better,"" Mr. Celik said. But he said the village decided it had had enough when a farmer was killed for refusing to cooperate with the rebels. ""They wanted his son and his money,"" he said. ""And at 5 o'clock one day they came and killed him."" Mr. Kansiz said: ""These people are in the middle, and they are confused. A young man disappears, and everyone understands he has gone to the mountains. But the terrorists' punishment for betrayal is very simple: they kill, while the state puts people into jail for two years. You have to understand the difference to understand the people here."" Map of Turkey showing location of Diyarbakir."
