"The last seven days have been the most violent in Algeria's nearly six-year civil war. The Government reports that nearly 400 civilians were massacred in that week by the Armed Islamic Group. The rest of the world has gone along with the Government's insistence that the violence is the business of Algerians only. But Algeria's President, Liamine Zeroual, has refused to negotiate with even moderate Islamists. It is time for other nations, especially France, to use their influence to press for talks. Algeria descended into brutality after the army canceled parliamentary elections in 1992 to prevent a victory by an Islamic coalition. One wing broke off to form the Armed Islamic Group, and at least 60,000 people have been killed since. Government officials blame the group for the massacres, but they have not allowed journalists to investigate the killings independently. Many are certainly the work of that terrorist movement, but some may involve government soldiers and some result from reprisals between Islamists and members of government-backed local civilian militias. Most of the violence has taken place in the outer suburbs of Algiers, the capital, a region full of military barracks. It takes time to hack dozens of people to death, yet soldiers have not intervened to stop the killings. Many in Algeria feel the military has let the killings proceed for propaganda purposes or to justify its role and budget. President Zeroual maintains that building Algerian democracy will eventually end the war by drawing Algerians into a working political process. The constitutional referendum and presidential and legislative elections held in the last three years, however, have been rigged toward the Government and have not helped to reduce the violence. While calling for a dialogue among Algerians, France has not used its considerable influence on Mr. Zeroual's Government to push him to talk. France provides about $1 billion in aid each year and is Algeria's primary source of imports. Just as important, the Francophone Government in Algiers looks to France for moral support. During the French campaign, members of Lionel Jospin's Socialist Party advocated negotiations and cooler relations between Paris and Algiers. But since taking office Mr. Jospin has moved his Government closer to Algiers. He sent his Foreign Minister there to attend a meeting of regional foreign ministers and restored landing rights to Air-Algerie in Paris. Other nations and institutions follow France's lead. The European Union is negotiating an association agreement with Algeria, and should condition Algeria's involvement on talks to end the war."
