"The United States said today that Israeli soldiers continued to violate the rights of Palestinians in the occupied territories, causing ''avoidable deaths and injuries.'' At the same time, the State Department reported a ''significant increase in violence by Palestinians directed at other Palestinians.'' The criticism of Israel was tough, but less severe than the department's assessment of human rights in Iraq, Cuba and Myanmar, formerly Burma. In its annual report on human rights, the State Department said Israel, which receives more American aid than any other country, had adopted guidelines to minimize the use of force in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Nevertheless, it said, the military authorities in the occupied territories regularly enter Palestinian houses without search warrants. Such forced entries result in ''beatings, destruction of property and arrests,'' the report said. In 1989, it said, 88 Arab houses were demolished and 82 were sealed by the Israelis ''for security reasons.'' Palestinian Violence, Too The report said 432 Palestinians were killed last year in violence related to the uprising in the occupied territories. Of these, 304 were killed by Israeli security forces or settlers, and 128 were killed by other Palestinians. Thirteen Israelis were killed by Palestinians in the territories, it said. The Palestinian victims of Palestinian violence had worked with the Israeli authorities, had advocated political compromise with Israel or were seen for other reasons as informers or collaborators, the report said. Some of these attacks and acts of intimidation were carried out by Palestinian gangs like the Red Eagles and the Black Panthers, it said. The report is to be made public by the State Department on Wednesday, but copies circulated freely today among members of Congress and human rights groups. Last year's report said there had been ''a substantial increase in human rights violations'' as a result of Israel's response to the Palestinian uprising. The State Department's tone last year was perhaps slightly sharper, and the criticism of Israel was somewhat more categorical. This year, criticism is interwoven with political analysis describing the Palestinians' goals and the reasons for Israel's crackdown. Israeli Reply The Israeli Embassy said it had cooperated with the State Department and supplied information used in the report this year. Ruth Yaron, an embassy spokeswoman, said the violent nature of the uprising left Israel ''no alternative to a response entailing the use of force.'' She noted that 90 Israeli officers and soldiers have been prosecuted and punished for violating Israeli guidelines since the uprising began in December 1987. However, the State Department said such ''regulations often were not vigorously enforced, many cases of unjust killing did not result in disciplinary action, and punishments often were lenient.'' The report, prepared by Richard Schifter, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, said ''Iraq's human rights record remained abysmal in 1989.'' Freedom of speech, press, assembly and association are ''virtually nonexistent'' in Iraq, and intelligence agencies use torture and summary executions to stifle opposition to the Government of President Saddam Hussein. Mr. Schifter found ''severe repression of all forms of political opposition'' in Myanmar. The report said that the country's ''dismal human rights situation deteriorated even further in 1989'' as ''the Government arbitrarily arrested or detained several thousand persons,'' including opposition leaders. Even Worse in Cuba The State Department said respect for human rights also ''worsened significantly'' last year in Cuba as the Government of Fidel Castro cracked down on human-rights-monitoring groups. It had showed some tolerance for such groups through September 1988, when the United Nations Human Rights Commission sent a delegation to Cuba. But since then, the report said, Mr. Castro ''has taken or fabricated opportunities to harass, detain or imprison'' 50 human rights advocates, and the Government has ''silenced many of its leading domestic critics.'' The department gave a delicately balanced assessment of rights in the Soviet Union. ''A remarkable opening up of the political process'' has occurred under President Mikhail S. Gorbachev, it said, but added that Soviet bureaucrats and K.G.B. officers practice ''old authoritarian habits'' in an effort to intimidate dissenters. The report noted that many countries in Eastern Europe were forced to allow greater latitude for the exercise of rights. ''Poland made dramatic progress in human rights in 1989,'' it said. But it added that the Polish Interior Minister, Gen. Czeslaw Kiszczak, a Communist, ''continued to supervise the uniformed police, the powerful security apparatus and the militarized riot police.'' Bulgaria Somewhat Better In Bulgaria, it said, after 35 years of repressive Communist rule, people began to enjoy freedom of speech, assembly and association. But the Interior Ministry there ''maintained strict domestic control through the militia, state security officers, internal security troops'' and border guards. In East Germany, it said, ''the authorities allowed increased freedom of speech'' and tolerated large street demonstrations in the final months of 1989. The report said El Salvador made ''little progress'' in prosecuting important human rights cases last year. It said the number of politically motivated killings continued to decline, and it asserted that systematic killings by paramilitary death squads had given way to ''individual acts of right-wing vigilantism.'' In Nicaragua, it said, the human rights situation ''remained poor in 1989,'' even though the Sandinista Government allowed its opponents to operate more freely as elections near."
