"France's normally close relations with Morocco have soured over a new French book that accuses King Hassan II of systematic human rights violations. Moroccan officials assert that the French Government has helped organize a defamation campaign against the King because the writer of the book has been interviewed several times on Government-owned French television and radio stations. French officials say they were merely allowing the broadcasters to exercise freedom of the press. Butsome Moroccans argue that the French Government was blithely letting state-owned broadcasters criticize the King as a means of pursuing France's policy of getting African nations, including Morocco, to improve their human rights performance. ""Our Friend the King,"" the newly published book by Gilles Perrault, is a biography of King Hassan and examines cases of torture, killing and political imprisonment said to have been carried out by the Moroccan Government. Officials from the North African nation have threatened to end their cooperation agreements with France overthis matter, and the French Foreign Minister, Roland Dumas, scheduled a hasty trip to Rabat to meet with the King Friday to mend relations. Morocco's Prime Minster, Azzeddine Laraki, wrote a letter to his French counterpart, Michel Rocard, to denounce a ""campaign of denigration"" against his Government. Mr. Laraki alluded to an interview that state-owned Radio France Internationale, which is France's version of Voice of America. Mr. Rocard replied that his Government could not restrain the press and broadcasting because French governments ""have been committed to a policy of giving complete independenceto radio and television broadcasters."" According to MAP, the official Moroccan press agency, 200,000 Moroccans sent messages to France to protest French reports criticizing the King. In a speech, the King said: ""More or less, they've accused me of being crazy. If that's true, all Moroccans must be crazy."" The dispute has fueled tensions dating from colonial times, with Moroccans saying they resent France's telling them what to do. From 1912 to 1956, Morocco was a protectorate of France and Spain, and France remains its largest trading partner. The dispute worsened 12 days ago when the Moroccan Government learned that Danielle Mitterrand, the wife of President Francois Mitterrand, was planning to visit a refugee camp ina town in the western Algeria, where some anti-Moroccan guerrillas are based. Mrs. Mitterrand Cancels Trip Mrs. Mitterrand, who heads France Liberte, a Paris-based human rights organization that helps refugees, canceled the trip after Moroccan officials protested and one Rabat newspaper wrote that her trip showed that she ""clearly does not love Morocco."" Moroccan officials said her trip would encourage the Polisario guerrillas, who are fighting Morocco's claims over the Western Sahara, a former Spanish territory that is rich in minerals. On Thursday, Mrs. Mitterrand aggravated tensions by meeting in Paris with the wife of a Polisario leader, causing one Moroccan paper to write that she was ""throwing oil on the fire."" After his meeting with King Hassan Friday, Foreign Minister Dumas said that tensions had been reduced and that both sides reiterated their desire to maintain friendly relations. He added that ""the French government in no way took part"" in a campaign to criticize the King, and he repeated that the French press and broadcasting have ""total freedom of expression."" On Sept. 11, the Moroccan Interior Minister, Driss Basri, met with the French Interior Minister, Pierre Joxe, to seek to prevent publication of Mr. Perrault's book. He even offered to buy up all the copies. Mr. Joxe rejected the request. Mr. Perrault said his book ""is not against Morocco as Hassan tries to make people believe,"" adding, ""It is for the Moroccan people."""
