"The defendant was just a balding, middle-aged man with thick glasses and a slouch. The charge against him: the attempt ''to blot out an entire people from the face of the earth.'' And as the black and white images of the trial of Adolf Eichmann flickered through a dark exhibit room in the Jewish Museum yesterday, a group of teen-age Hebrew school students from Dresher, Pa., saw for the first time the face of a man many of them had never heard of, who had been hanged years before any of them were born. The students were among the hundreds of people who crowded into an exhibit that opened yesterday marking the 25th anniversary of the Eichmann trial in Jerusalem. As they and older visitors watched the tapes of the legal proceedings against the Nazi war criminal, it became a day for passing on a piece of the past, from old to young, from memory to history. ''Unless you were there, you don't know how it felt,'' said Belinda Marcus, 15 years old, whose grandfather fled across the German-Dutch border on a motorcycle in the 1930's to avoid arrest by the Gestapo. Trial 'Served as a Record' A few feet away stood Dr. Paul Benko of Santa Rosa, Calif., a 56-year-old former prisoner of the Dachau concentration camp, who was saved by American troops in 1945 on the morning he was to be executed. His family, like many of the Jews of Hungary, he said, had been sent to concentration camps under Eichmann's orders. ''The trial was important because it served as a record,'' Dr. Benko said. ''All that was done was not lost in the rubble and the bones.'' Lieut. Col. Adolf Eichmann was chief of the Jewish section of the Gestapo, responsible for the concentration camps, the mass transportation of the Jewish population of Europe there and the techniques of mass murder. Although he was never a high-level member of the Nazi regime, he bore responsibility for turning the idea of the ''final solution'' into an efficient machine of slaughter. Eichmann was captured by Israeli agents in Argentina in 1960 and tried from April to December 1961 for ''crimes against humanity.'' In 1962, he became the only person ever executed by the State of Israel. Larger Questions Raised The exhibit, which will be on display through May 11 at the museum at 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, stresses not only the crimes of one man, but also many of the larger questions raised by the Eichmann case that have troubled jurists and scholars ever since: What is the responsibility of a functionary who follows immoral orders? Where does guilt end when a society turns criminal? How is it that the face of evil can assume the features of an ordinary man? The visitors, ranging from toddlers to the elderly, wandered expressionless past pictures of the witnesses at the trial, transcripts of the judge's statements and handwritten testimony by Eichmann himself. They then entered a darkened room where they sat on benches and watched videotapes of the trial on two television monitors. Elaine Robinson Grossman, 34, who had come with the busload of students and her husband, a rabbi from the Mount Sinai Temple in Dresher, said she had expected the students to be more interested in seeing an exotic exhibit at the museum about Jews in China. To her surprise, she said, the students were more interested in learning about Eichmann. Hard Realities ''When I was a girl, you used to see people's parents who had numbers tattooed on their arms,'' Mrs. Grossman recalled. ''It was a very vivid thing that made the Holocaust real. These days it is very hard to imagine that it was real.'' ''The people at this trial were looking for justice, not revenge,'' she added. ''Revenge wouldn't have been enough.'' Among the other visitors was Wilfred Schwerin von Krosigk, 32, and his wife, Laurie. He was born and raised in Germany. She is from a Jewish family that had lost several members in Poland during the Holocaust. ''It was fascinating to see him - it was like watching those films of Hitler kissing his dog,'' Mrs. Schwerin von Krosigk said. ''He looked so normal.'' ''It was much more distant for me growing up in Germany,'' Mr. Schwerin von Krosigk said. ''There it was not spoken of so much. Here it confronts you. It is unavoidable. ''I wasn't born then,'' he said. ''But as a German, in some way, you always feel some responsibility.''"
