"IT has been a quarter century since a balding, bespectacled man stood in a glass box to face charges that he had played a leading role in the crime of the century. In the years since the prosecution of Lieut. Col. Adolf Eichmann, chief of the Jewish section of the Gestapo and the man responsible for Nazi concentration camps that administered the ''Final Solution,'' it has been not so much his conviction, or even his execution, but rather his capture in Argentina and trial in Israel that continue to be debated by scholars and international lawyers. Indeed, when each week brings new reports of human rights violations, bombings and hijackings, the issues raised by the Eichmann case seem as fresh as today's headlines. What can one nation do to change the internal policies of another? Can a terrorist be seized, like Eichmann, and transported for trial? Why does international law seem so ineffective? Last weekend, at a forum organized by the Jewish Museum in New York, these issues were discussed by a panel that included Louis Henkin, University Professor at Columbia University; Marvin E. Frankel, a former Federal judge and chairman of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights; Abraham D. Sofaer, another former judge who is legal adviser to the State Department, and Telford Taylor, former chief prosecutor at the Nuremberg trials and a professor at Benjamin Cardozo Law School. Excerpts follow. Within hours, as history goes, of the Eichmann trial, one or two million Cambodians were murdered, maybe a half-million Biafrans and a half-million Ugandans, some hundreds of thousands of Indonesians, then, on a more retail level, merely thousands or tens of thousands in Argentina, South Africa, the Philippines, Guatemala, Chile and Haiti. You can name other countries; I don't want to omit Syria and Iran. A question could be asked: How much do we, all of us, really care when these monstrous crimes are committed against other ethnic groups than our own or by governments that are not our national enemies or are not thought to be our national enemies? We all know that there is a special point in remembering that some crimes against humanity were crimes against Jews or Armenians or Cambodians, and that some ways of generalizing are not ways of loving any of us or caring about our memory. And yet, if there is an impact of the Eichmann trial and the other enormous events that we remember with it, then these horrors do indeed have to be generalized, and the notion of crimes against humanity has to continue to be with us and have meaning. And so we look around the world and see situations where an effort has been made or will be made to do something about marking the demands of justice against the beasts who do things like Eichmann did. And we've seen events of that nature in Argentina, in the Philippines, in Haiti. One thing was clear in Israel about Eichmann's trial - there was no disagreement about whether he should be tried. In the countries I've just mentioned there is anguish about whether to conduct trials, whom to try, how deep to cut. In Argentina, while the few trials were being held, the human rights community was torn apart on whether President Raul Alfonsin was handling it correctly, being too gentle, using the right court. Within Argentina there were human rights criminals still at large, still growling, and there was a question of the extent of the danger in bringing them to trial. The same kind of problem exists in the Philippines. The situation is worse in Haiti, which doesn't have a coherently organized government. One hopes that other places - Chile, Pakistan, someday maybe Czechoslovakia and Poland - will have the problem of what to do with human rights criminals. HENKIN: How Far Have We Come? It is important to keep in mind the issues that were raised at the time of Nuremberg: Whether how a nation treats its inhabitants is anybody else's business; the jurisdiction of an international tribunal to make the laws, to prosecute and to adjudicate and, finally, the issue of what the lawyers will call ex post facto, applying law which you've just articulated to past events. We hardly use the phrase ''crimes against humanity'' anymore. We now talk about human rights and violations of human rights. We've gone far from considering merely those things so atrocious and so massive in scale that we consider them crimes against humanity. We now consider violations of human rights (that are) less terrible and less massive. It is now universally accepted that how a state treats its own inhabitants is no longer only its own business. Look and see what is done about apartheid in South Africa, where every nation in the world has been on record as condemning it and some of them are proposing sanctions. But what is also important, and it builds the bridge to the Eichmann case, is that we have had no international tribunals to do anything either about crimes against humanity or about international human rights. There are tribunals in some regions, like Europe and Latin America, but they don't try individuals, they bring proceedings against states. Therefore, the spread of the international human rights movement and the establishment of human rights law, whether by customary law or by treaty, has left the implementation of those human rights to states. I, as lawyer in the State Department in charge of nitty gritty problems, such as getting a criminal into your courtroom, have another perspective on the Eichmann case. This was a monster on the loose for years. How did that happen? How did this man live like a normal person for so many years? Why were the demands for his arrest ignored? How could the world go on as though nothing had happened? It was a very important failure of the international legal system. So Israel took the law into its own hands, which is a very interesting question for me. I'm sitting in the Senate hearing rooms every now and then, and Senators and Representatives turn to me and say, ''Why don't you go and get these guys? We're talking about people who just kill Americans in cold blood around the world. Why don't you go and get them?'' And those are the moderates. The extremists say, ''Why don't you kill them? What's to talk about getting them? That's complicated - you have trials and they'll grab hostages and they'll ask for people to be released in exchange for these hostages. Go and kill them. It's better, more efficient.'' I like to remind people that it is a violation of international duties, frequently, not to turn someone over who is a criminal. And at the slightest suggestion that perhaps, with the quiet acquiescence from some state, we take someone, I get a furor from the International Law Bar. How could I suggest such an outrageous thing? I don't hear any furor about why a man is allowed to live in society for all this time without turning him over. Why is this woman allowed to come on TV in Tripoli, Lebanon, and talk about her not having participated in this bombing, and then be able to go back home because no one's going to bring her to be questioned and tried in a court of law? That's not something we should get all excited about. The thing we have to get excited about is a legal adviser suggesting that, God forbid, the United States might, with the acquiesence of a state, seize somebody that we have a Federal indictment to seize. The Eichmann case reminds me of an instance in which Israel did seize somebody, and I don't blame them. I don't believe private bodies can undertake to act like courts. When the President's Commission on the Holocaust was established, I was a member of it for a time. And one of the proposals made to that commission was that, apart from the building, the statue, whatever else was chosen as a suitable memorial, a commission of wise men - or lawyers who think they're wise men - should be established to scan the world, and point out that something was going wrong here or there and something ought to be done about it. I was against the proposal because it seemed to me that, after two or three of them might have gone right, they would hit one where there is great dispute about whether the situation in the place they're pointing to was really the way they thought it was. For an institution like a memorial commission to get involved in that sort of thing would be self-destructive. I'm afraid I have less faith in the wisdom of elderly lawyers. I don't believe that it's possible to have such a body that will determine where things need to be done and how fast. That's what the press and legislators and other people are for, to discuss these things and hope that things come out for the best. But I don't think you set up a body of Platonic wise men to handle these matters."
