"The United Nations group charged with encouraging respect for human rights has begun investigations of abuses in Iraq and in Kuwait while it was under Iraqi occupation. At a meeting in Geneva that ended on Friday, the United Nations Human Rights Commission also ordered an investigation of abuses in Cuba and maintained pressure on Iran's Government with the aim of improving Teheran's treatment of dissidents. The commission also agreed to monitor arbitrary imprisonment around the world. Commenting on the measures, some private American human rights organizations called the six-week 47th annual meeting of the Human Rights Commission one of its most successful in years, even though China and several other governments the organizations consider repressive escaped censure. ""It looks like one of the most successful meetings for some time, with three new investigations and a decision to monitor arbitrary detentions,"" said Felice D. Gaer, executive director of the International League for Human Rights in New York. Reed Brody, executive secretary of the Geneva-based International Commission of Jurists, said, ""Everyone feels this was very productive."" Shaming the Violators While the commission cannot force governments to respect their obligations under the Universal Declaration on Human Rights, it can try to shame them into doing so by hearing charges of violations, undertaking investigations and adopting critical resolutions urging compliance. After officially ignoring human rights violations in Iraq for years, the 43-nation commission voted overwhelmingly this year to investigate Government atrocities there and in occupied Kuwait, even though Baghdad said it would not cooperate. The Bush Administration also scored a victory in its perennial struggle to see the Cuban Government of President Fidel Castro condemned and investigated over mistreatment of its political opponents. Last year, the commission merely asked the Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, to discuss reported human rights abuses with Cuba. But this year it appointed an investigator and instructed him to report back on Cuba's rights record after talking with both the Government ""and the citizens of Cuba,"" a reference to rights groups there. Inquiry on Iran Continues Despite pressure from Muslim countries to halt monitoring of Iran's human rights performance, the commission voted to continue its investigation for another year but said it would be suspended after that if Teheran made ""further progress."" In his report on Iran, the commission's investigator, Reynaldo Galindo Pohl of El Salvador, said the position of Iran's Bahai minority ""continues to be uncertain."" Bahais are regarded as heretics by Iran's Muslim fundamentalist leaders. Although none have been executed recently, as they were in the early years of the Islammic republic, they are still denied university education, passports and the right to inherit property, Mr. Galindo Pohl said. The commission's decision to establish a working group to investigate arbitrary detention of prisoners throughout the world was welcomed by Western governments and human rights organizations. The commission also expressed its concern over recent killings in the Soviet republics of Latvia and Lithuania. It asked to see the results of investigations in progress there in a carefully worded statement, which also praised President Mikhail S. Gorbachev's support for human rights. This was the first time that the commission has taken any action on reported human rights abuses in the Soviet Union."
