"Like history, justice is a uniquely human notion, so deeply rooted in the consciousness of mankind that its rejection is properly called inhuman. The recent rash of terrorism in the world is a reminder of the outrageous deformation that results, however, when the two are confounded. The I.R.A. acknowledged responsibility for the pre-Christmas bombing of Harrod's department store in London, but said it was ''unauthorized.'' The implication was that it recognized the haphazard slaughter and wounding of so many innocents to be unjust, but that it also maintains the intention of killing people elsewhere to avenge Irish history. History is the argument invoked to validate wanton murder by all kinds of terrorist groups. As though history had ever been just, as though it could be undone, as though its violence could be an excuse to make more terrible history. Such ideas are the opposite of the message that Christmas brings, which exists in all religions. It bids the present be cheerful with the promise of a better future. The Christmas customs of northern climes borrow from the pagan celebrations of nature's pledge of renewal, lights in the darkest winter, trees, mistletoe and holly in assurance of future greening. Southern traditions celebrate other symbols and seasons, but they all offer thanks and prayers that life go on. History is the long shadow of the past. It is important because it can neither be escaped nor revised. It shapes the understanding of the present. But it cannot be twisted into a sentence of death, to friend or foe. It does not prove anything except that people and societies can enhance life, and need to do a lot more about it. Israelis, Palestinians, Lebanese, Armenians, some mad Irishmen and many others cite history to prove their claims, to define their version of justice. It is an old story, which has to do with what ''belongs'' to whom, who has established ''historic rights.'' If present conflicts could have been solved by reference to history, they would have faded away. Justice is a very different matter. It is about overcoming the trials imposed by history, not because they were unfair but because it is necessary and possible to find solutions. Justice is about finding ways to a more serene future. Terrorists deny history and mock justice, putting themselves outside the very civilizing and humane concepts they pretend to promote. The most useful lessons of history are that an end can be put to at least some wrongs when the future is given its due. The task is always to see ahead, which is much harder than looking back in anger, but the sense of justice offers a guide. The question for the present is what can be done, not what shouldn't have been done. When it has been put that way, great things have been achieved. Slavery has been abolished. France and Germany have been reconciled, ending a millennial source of wars. Human misery has been alleviated in parts of the world in such a way that the biblical injunction to multiply and be fruitful has brought new miseries, to be alleviated with a greater appeal to justice, not to history. It isn't only the violent who abuse the past with their demands to make it over, though they do the most harm. The ''court of history'' is a delusion, advanced in the interest of self-serving causes. History doesn't judge, it is simply there to be acknowledged and improved upon. One bright example of this insight in the multitude of current struggles is Poland's Lech Walesa and his stoic wife, Danuta, whose country has an especially tortured history. He speaks not of sacrificing his compatriots for some dream of bloody victory, but of encouraging them to live and work with the spirited aim of a society worthy of their consent. Suicidal massacres by Shiite fanatics are distressing. But they are only an example of how badly the urge to curl back into the solace of a self- righteous vision of history serves the needs of justice. If there be a divine justice, it is beyond the reach of presumptuous human hands. For man, justice means dignity and decency for the living and their posterity. It isn't always available, but the aspiration persists and is demeaned by crime. This is a time of great confusion in a world of many battles, many hatreds. They interlace as never before, involving people in disputes that were never their personal concern, killing and threatening people for reasons they never thought to endorse or oppose. In the horror, it all brings a glimpse of clarity about the simple meaning of good will. Next door, or across the earth, it has to do with making the best of things that were never ideal and helping others to do the same. To look for justice in history is to doom its shining goal."
