"In a report to be issued later this week, the United States says Israel's response to the Palestinian uprising ''led to a substantial increase in human rights violations'' in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip last year. The report, assembled by the State Department, criticizes human rights practices in the occupied territories, saying Israeli troops caused ''many avoidable deaths and injuries.'' The report notes that the Israeli authorities sometimes prosecuted or disciplined security personnel and settlers who killed Palestinians. But it says, ''Regulations were not rigorously enforced; punishments were usually lenient, and there were many cases of unjustified killing which did not result in disciplinary actions or prosecutions.'' The findings are to be made public in the State Department's annual report on human rights practices around the world, which is to be issued on Wednesday. A copy was obtained tonight from a private, nonprofit group that keeps watch on human rights conditions. Israel Under a Microscope The chapter of the State Department's report on Israel always receives special attention because the nation is the largest recipient of American aid. This year it is getting $1.8 billion in military assistance and $1.2 billion in economic aid. In the last year, the United States has criticized specific actions by Israel, but the new report is the first comprehensive statement of American concern about Israel's response to the Palestinian uprising. Under a 1974 law, the United States is not supposed to provide foreign aid to any country that engages in ''a consistent pattern of gross violations'' of human rights. The latest report may temporarily increase tension between the United States and Israel, but is unlikely to lead to any reduction in American aid to Israel, for which there is strong bipartisan support in Congress. The report concedes that there is more information available about the West Bank and the Gaza Strip than about many countries because of ''Israel's open and democratic society.'' A diplomat at the Israeli Embassy said tonight that he would have no immediate comment on the report because neither he nor Israeli Government officials had read it. In an introduction to the report, Richard Schifter, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, said there had been an increase in respect for rights in the Soviet Union, Hungary and Poland. ''We still cannot say that there has been a fundamental shift in the Soviet Union's approach to human rights,'' he said, but ''advocates of significant systemic reform appear to have gained strength.'' The ''most significant human rights violations of the year 1988,'' measured by their severity and by the number of people affected, occurred in Iraq, Burundi and the Sudan, Mr. Schifter said. But the report was most detailed about Israel's handling of Palestinians. As part of their uprising, young Palestinians threw stones and firebombs at Israeli security forces, erected barricades and burned tires so as to interfere with traffice, the report notes. ''The Israeli Defense Forces, caught by surprise and untrained and inexperienced in riot control, responded in a manner which led to a substantial increase in human rights violations,'' the report said. The repot gives new statistics on casualties in the uprising, known in Arabic as the intifada. ''Figures compiled from press, Palestinian and Israeli Government sources indicate that 366 Palestinians were killed in 1988 as a result of the uprising, most of them by the I.D.F., some by Israeli settlers,'' the report said. ''Thirteen Palestinians were killed by other Palestinians for suspected collaboration with Isareli authorities. Over 20,000 Palestinians were wounded or injured by the I.D.F.'' In addition, it said, Israeli ''soldiers frequently used gunfire in situations that did not present mortal danger to troops, causing many avoidable deaths and injuries.'' In five cases last year, ''unarmed Palestinians in detention died under questionable circumstances or were clearly killed by the detaining officials,'' the report added. The report says that ''at least 154 houses of Arabs were demolished or sealed for security reasons, affecting over 1,000 people'' last year. The report states that 36 Palestinians were deported from the occupied territories, compared with 9 in 1987. The United States contends that such deportations violate the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, intended to protect civilians in time of war. The Israeli Supreme Court has held that both types of action are lawful. The use of administrative detention ''greatly increased in 1988'' in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the report said. ''While the peak number of administrative detainees at any one time is uncertain, the number was 2,600 in September 1988. As of Nov. 28, Israeli Government figures put the number at 1,590.'' Violations in Arab Countries Turning to rights violations in Arab countries, the report said, ''Iraq's abysmal human rights record remained unacceptable in 1988.'' It charges that Iraq used chemical weapons against both guerrillas and civilians in attempts to crush a Kurdish rebellion, and it says there were unconfirmed reports that Iraq moved ''tens of thousands of Kurds'' from their homes to camps outside Kurdish areas. The State Department criticized Syria as ''a generally repressive dictatorship,'' and it said: ''There were no signs of progress toward a freer political system or a greater respect for individual human rights.'' The ''presence of police and security officials is pervasive, especially in Damascus.'' In Saudi Arabia, the report said, civil liberties are ''significantly restricted,'' and criticism of Islam or of the ruling family are not allowed."
