"Violations of human rights have become widespread in Afghanistan since Soviet forces joined the fighting there nearly six years ago, according to a report presented today to the United Nations. The report, prepared for the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, says that violations include indiscriminate mass bombings and killings of civilians; mutilations and routine torture; the forced evacuation of rural areas; the imprisonment without trial of tens of thousands of political prisoners, and religious intolerance. The report says the actions appear intended not only to destroy opposition to the Afghan Government, but to break the spirit of an independent people and destroy the traditional family and tribal structures. ''Every hour lost is detrimental to the population and to the human rights situation in the country,'' wrote Felix Ermacora, an Austrian law professor who prepared the report. War Called 'Increasingly Cruel' It says that the Soviet-backed Afghan Government, ''with heavy support from foreign troops, acts with great severity against opponents or suspected opponents of the regime without any respect for human rights violations.'' It says that the increasingly cruel nature of the war has been endangering entire peoples and tribes. Mr. Ermacora, who was not allowed by the Afghan Government to visit the Government side in the war, based his report largely on evidence collected from two visits to Pakistan, where he interviewed Afghan refugees and visited hospitals. The Afghan delegate, Mohammed Farid Zarif, condemned the commission's investigation today as interference in Afghanistan's internal affairs. He called the report a ''wild and worthless piece of trash'' and labeled its charges ''shallow and superfluous hallucinations.'' Mr. Zarif accused Professor Ermacora of pro-Nazi activities and tendencies. The United Nations committee currently debating Mr. Ermacora's report is expected to vote later this week on a resolution introduced by a number of Western countries commending him for his report and expressing ''great concern'' for the violations of rights in Afghanistan. Commission Approved Report Last February, when Mr. Ermacora presented an earlier version, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights in Geneva voted 26 to 8 to urge a halt to ''grave and massive human rights abuses.'' Citing Afghan witnesses, the report lists purported abuses committed against civilians since the Soviet intervention, including hostage-taking, the rape of women, the plundering of houses, the wholesale destruction of crops and forced conscription of children. ''Mosques have been desecrated, religious books destroyed and in some cases even used as toilet paper, while members of the Islamic faith have been obliged to eat pork and to drink alcohol,'' Mr. Ermacora wrote. He added that rural populations suffered from starvation and disease because the Government withholds food and medicine.'' Toy Bombs to Maim Children The report says that toy bombs shaped like pens, birds, harmonicas, radios or matchboxes were being dropped from helicopters to maim children. Mr. Ermacora calls these actions ''totally out of proportion to any military requirement.'' Although the report does not specifically mention the estimated 115,000 Soviet troops stationed in Afghanistan, Western diplomats consider it the first major instance in which the United Nations has documented human rights violations committed by the Soviet Union. The report concludes that international organizations have ''an urgent responsibility to find ways and means to insure respect and guarantees of human rights'' in Afghanistan, including the right of four million refugees to return home."
