"The National Action Party, which has been linked to Mehmet Ali Agca, the accused assailant of Pope John Paul II, aspired to establish a fascist dictatorship in Turkey by forceful means, according to an indictment by Turkish prosecutors. The party was organized along the lines of European fascist parties, the document adds, with an ultranationalist, authoritarian and virulently anti-Communist view of the world. Only now has it been officially disclosed that the party and its affiliates were engaged in the political terrorism that tormented Turkey until the armed forces seized power in September. ''It is clear that the N.A.P. wanted to dominate the state through illegal ways because of the clandestine acts and efforts of the armed fascist and racist gang set up in the N.A.P. and its affiliated Idealist associations,'' the prosecutors said in a 945-page indictment. The document, the work of seven months for six prosecutors, has been made available to some journalists. It outlines the party's objectives, organization, methods and alleged crimes. Party Leaders to Go on Trial Alpaslan Turkes, the party's leader, and 219 of its senior members face the death penalty in a martial-law trial scheduled to start next month. Mr. Agca, seized in the shooting of the Pope at the Vatican last Wednesday, is not mentioned in the indictment. But the murder of an Istanbul editor, Abdi Ipekci, is one of the cases listed. The accused assailant of the Pope was arrested for the murder of the editor but escaped from a military prison in 1979 with the help of National Action Party sympathizers. He was later sentenced to death in absentia. The authorities are said to have prepared an annex to the indictment that includes details on the Ipekci murder. 'An Independent Terrorist' Mr. Agca made confusing statements about his motives for killing Mr. Ipekci. In the Turkish prison, he said that he was ''an independent terrorist'' and had carried out the murder because the editor was ''a defender of the system,'' which Mr. Agca described as one of ''repression, injustice and exploitation.'' The murder indictment against Mr. Agca said that he was a rightist and, and after shooting Mr. Ipekci, had gone to the National Action Party's district headquarters in Istanbul and left the gun with Mehmet Sener, a party leader. According to legal sources, the indictment against Mr. Agca said his motive was ''to create circumstances that would induce the masses to accept a regime that was based on force and destroys all freedoms through intimidation by terror.'' 'Antagonized Some Circles' ''Because Abdi Ipekci antagonized some circles as chief editor of the widely distributed newspaper Milliyet, because of his well-known personality, his positions against anarchy and terror and his articles calling all reasonable people to unite it was therefore decided he would be the victim,'' the indictment said. ''Although Mehmet Ali Agca stated in his first interrogation that he murdered Ipekci for his own reasons and was neither a rightist nor a leftist, he indicated in testimony to the prosecution that he murdered Abdi Ipekci for political reasons and that he is a rightist. We understand from statements of Mehmet Ali Agca's brother and mother that he is an Idealist.'' The indictment against the National Action Party said that it established terrorist cells with the proclaimed purpose of saving Turkey from Communist aggression. Mr. Turkes is described in the document as ''longing for a fascist dictatorship.'' Letters by Mr. Turkes are cited to show that he favors ''a strong state'' and does not believe in political parties and democratic elections. In recent years, Mr. Turkes and the members of his party sought to maintain an image of respectability, strongly denying that they were fascists or had any connection with the right-wing terrorist organizations generally known here as Idealists. According to the indictment, the party was divided into two parts: a political wing that sought to achieve power through legal means and an activist wing - the Idealists. Documents have been found in the National Action Party headquarters linking the party to the Idealists. Aim Said to Be 'Massacre' ''The gang that hides under the cover of a political party applies reactionary, divisionist and cruel methods,'' the prosecutors said of the Idealists. They said that, while the radical leftists aimed at popular rebellion, the Idealists' objective was ''massacre.'' Mr. Turkes is accused of ordering the murder of a leftist labor leader, Kemal Turkler, and the leftist security chief in Adana, Cevat Yurdakul. He is also charged with attempting to change the constitutional order with the aim of establishing one-man rule ''against the principles of republicanism and democracy and with the use of force.'' An experienced and shrewd politician, Mr. Turkes, who is 64 years old, came close to assuming power in the past and has shared power on several occasions. A graduate of the Turkish Military Academy, he was arrested in 1946 for setting up secret organizations and promoting ''pan-Turanism'' - uniting the Turks and related ethnic groups of the world. He was a leader of the 1960 military coup against the Government of Adnan Menderes but was sent into seclusion by his colleagues in the junta because he favored continuation of the strong military regime whereas they aimed to return to democracy. Several years later, Mr. Turkes made his political comeback, taking over the small Republican Peasants Nation Party and in 1969 renaming it the National Action Party. He built the organization into one of the four major parties in the country, participating in two coalitions between 1975 and 1978 with Prime Minister Suleyman Demirel and giving Mr. Demirel's minority Government crucial support in the 10 months before the coup in September. During these periods, the National Action Party succeeded in placing many of its members in the Government, particularly in education and state security. According to the indictment, as of Sept. 12, 1980, there were 1,700 legal National-Idealist organizations, with about 200,000 registered members and a million sympathizers in a nation of 45 million people. Nazism Called Party's Model The National Action Party's doctrine was called ''nationalistpopulism,'' which the indictment says was nothing more than National Socialism, or Nazism. ''It is definitely established by books, articles, statements and letters written by the party members, including Chairman Alpaslan Turkes, and the supporters, that the N.A.P. aims to establish a fascist system on the basis of racism and chauvinism, behind the mask of 'nationalist-populism,' '' the prosecutors said. To support this, the indictment quotes from one of Mr. Turkes's books: ''The Turkish nation does not resemble any other nation. The Turkish nation is a nation that is created with superior characteristics by God.'' The party's ideology, and that of all the Idealist associations, is based on what is known as ''the nine lights'' - nationalism, moralism, corporatism, scientism, populism, progressivism, technologism, defense of freedom and defense of the peasantry. A Tightly Organized Society ''The state is an iron fist in a velvet glove,'' according to a report on the party's structures in the indictment. The party calls for a strong presidential system, a single-chamber legislature made up of experts, nationalized economic structures and the division of society into six sectors - workers, peasants, tradesmen, civil servants, the liberal professions and employers. Like the fascist parties of Western Europe, the indictment says, the party chief was given the title of Basbug, the Turkish equivalent of Caudillo in Spain; Fuhrer in Nazi Germany and Duce in Italy. The party used propaganda methods similar to those in Hitler's Germany and Mussolini's Italy to mobilize young people to ''condition and alienate the brains of the youth,'' the document went on. The indictment says that the party had organized mass rallies and used nationalist symbols such as the gray wolf and the three crescents. In Turkish historical legend, a gray wolf is said to have led the last Turkish tribes out of Central Asia. Three crescents adorned the flag of the Ottoman Empire."
