"The Palestine Liberation Organization's observer mission here is one of the group's most vital diplomatic outposts, a place from which the P.L.O. influences the United Nations agenda and maintains ties with dozens of nations. The P.L.O. made its first major appearance at the United Nations in 1974, when its chairman, Yasir Arafat, held up a gun and an olive branch in delivering his maiden speech before the General Assembly. Dozens of Middle East Resolutions That year, the assembly invited the P.L.O. to set up an observer mission. Since then, the mission has used its diplomatic privileges to put the Palestinian question at center stage while gaining precious legitimacy for itself as a player in the Arab-Israeli conflict and as the major representative of the Palestinians. Zehdi L. Terzi, who since 1975 has been the P.L.O.'s chief observer at the United Nations, has been responsible for dozens of Middle East resolutions, most of them harshly critical of Israel. The resolutions, some of which are passed in similar form year after year, are often approved by majority vote of the General Assembly as well as by various secondary United Nations organizations. Mr. Terzi also lobbies for the nearly $2 million that the United Nations spends each year on Palestinian programs, and he often goes before the Security Council to accuse Israel of human rights violations against the Palestinians in the occupied territories. Since 1980, the observer mission has been located in a town house owned by the P.L.O. at 115 East 65th Street in Manhattan. The building provides office space for Mr. Terzi and for his two deputies, as well as living quarters for the Terzi family. The mission is the center for much of the P.L.O.'s publicity and information work in the United States, although the State Department limits travel by P.L.O. officials to within 25 miles of New York City. Riyad H. Mansour, the deputy P.L.O. observer at the United Nations, is the only member of the delegation who can go outside that boundary, and this is because he is a United States citizen."
