"A United Nations investigator says the Iranian Government of Hojatolislam Hashemi Rafsanjani is continuing to violate its citizens' basic human rights on the same large scale as Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's Government, torturing and executing political enemies. The independent investigator, Prof. Reynaldo Galindo Pohl of El Salvador, concludes in a report issued this week that the change of government in Iran after Ayatollah Khomeini's death in June has not led to greater respect for individual human rights. Referring to the critical report on Iran's human rights performance he issued last year, Professor Pohl said nothing he had learned since would ''allow modification of the conclusions'' reached in it. He says he maintains his conviction ''that acts are being committed in Iran that are incompatible with international human rights instruments that are binding on the Iranian Government.'' As a result, he concludes that Iran's human rights record continues to merit ''both international concern and study and constant vigilance by the United Nations General Assembly and the Commission on Human Rights.'' This year's report, diplomats say, is particularly significant because it casts doubt on widespread expectation that President Rafsanjani will prove a more moderate leader, favoring pragmatic policies including closer cooperation with the rest of the world. In September, 185 members of the United States Congress expressed similar skepticism in a letter to Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, urging him to treat the new Iranian leadership with firmness ''rather than speculate and hope for the miraculous emergence of moderates from within the present ruling clique.'' ''Those who have been identified as moderates, including Hashemi Rafsanjani, the newly elected President, have continued the repressive policies of Khomeini,'' the letter said. Amnesty International, the human rights organization, reported in the same month that Iran accounted for 1,200 of the 1,600 executions it recorded in the first eight months of this year. Professor Pohl will present his report to a General Assembly committee on Monday, when it starts its annual review of human rights abuses around the world. For the first time the 12 European Community nations will jointly sponsor a resolution criticizing Iran's record and calling for another investigation next year, diplomats say. Last March, at the United Nations Human Rights Commission meeting, they sponsored a resolution protesting Ayatollah Khomeini's death sentence against the British author Salman Rushdie for his novel ''The Satanic Verses.'' President Rafsanjani has refused to lift that sentence. Sentences Changed to Death Professor Pohl reports a ''wave of executions'' in Iran during the second half of 1988 when, he says, ''many prisoners had their sentences changed to capital punishment, a great number of them having been tried for a second time after serving a previous sentence.'' On one occasion, he says, 200 to 300 relatives of prisoners were invited to Evin Prison in Teheran, where they were ''had to witness the execution of their relatives.'' Although the Iranian press has reported few political executions this year, the report says the large number of drug-trafficking executions appear to mask some carried out for political motives. The report also says at least 26 people have been executed by stoning over the last year, including 14 women convicted of adultery and prostitution. Professor Pohl reports widespread torture in Iranian prisons, including flogging, suspension from the ceiling, mock hangings, crowding prisoners into small rooms with insufficent air and withholding medical treatment. But he reports some improvement in the previous systematic persecution of members of the minority Bahai faith. He says that most of those imprisoned have been released, that some have had their property restored, and that children are generally allowed to enter primary and secondary schools."
