"A group of black Americans led by Bayard Rustin has urged Israel to move quickly to resolve the status of the black Hebrew cult and to eliminate discriminatory practices against black tourists. At a news conference after an 11-day inquiry, the Black Americans to Support Israel Committee issued a report that carefully avoided advising Israel on whether it should deport the 1,200 to 1,500 members of the sect or allow them to remain. Nor did the group address in detail allegations by some former cult members that their passports and property had been confiscated by the sect's leaders and that children had been subject to poor nutrition and corporal punishment. The group's members expressed concern, but said they could neither prove nor disprove the charges and considered them a police matter. The group was headed by Mr. Rustin of the A. Philip Randolph Institute, an educational, civil rights and labor organization. He is also chairman of the Black Americans to Support Israel Committee. The delegation included Alexander J. Allen, vice president of the National Urban League; Lewis J. Carter 3d, national labor director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, and Mrs. Arthur C. Logan of the National Council of Negro Women. Arrangements for the visit were made by the American Jewish Committee, the American Jewish Congress and the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai B'rith. Made Up of Black Americans The black Hebrew cult, which calls itself the Original Hebrew Israelite Nation, consists entirely of black Americans. It emerged more than a decade ago around the conviction that blacks were descendants of ancient tribes of Israel that were exiled to Africa and sold into slavery. Members came to Israel on tourist visas and remained after their permits exoired, crowding into small apartments in the Negev towns of Dimona, Arad and Mitzpe Ramon. At first Israel offered them citizenship if they converted to Judaism, but they refused, asserting that they, not the modern Israelis, were the true Jews. The result has been a situation in which they are neither deported nor given legal status. They cannot legally work, although many do manual labor for low wages. Their children are barred from Israeli schools and the Government has declined to provide them, as noncitizens, with adequate subsidized housing. In an effort to prevent any more of the cult's members from entering Israel, officials at the Tel Aviv airport have subjected blacks to special scrutiny, the group said. ''At present,'' its report said, ''police officers are taking some black Americans from the passport control checkpoint line before they reach the immigration officer, simply on the basis of color. Some have been deported to the United States without access to a telephone or allowed contact with the American Consulate staff.'' Mr. Rustin warned Israeli officials that affidavits testifying to mistreatment were being collected in the United States from people who said they had simply wanted to visit the holy places; such evidence could be used as anti-Israel propaganda, he asserted, to prove that the holy places were not truly accessible. Mr. Allen added that Yosef Burg, the Interior Minister, had indicated that the airport procedures would be improved. No Evidence of Racism Detected Nevertheless, the group declared that ''we have found no official racism in Israel, and we conclude that racist policies are not the reason for the discrimination at the airport and the plight of the black Hebrew community.'' It attributed the problems to the uncertain status of the cult.  ''Continued inaction creates a condition with serious legal, social, political and human rights implications,'' the report said.  ''Further, it exacerbates intergroup tensions in America and severely damages Israel's well-deserved reputation as a freedom-loving democracy which has been able to accept and absorb a wide variety of different racial ethnic and religious groups.'' The group was divided by the charges of abuse inside the cult heard from former members and from the police, with Mr. Rustin reportedly seriously disturbed by them and other members less willing to speak out. As a result, the committee as a whole took no clear stand, saying only that further investigations would be in order. ''Any closed community with a highly authoritarian structure,'' the statement said, ''tends to raise problems for a wider society in which it exists. This group has an ideology which sets it in direct opposition to some of the values of the Israeli society. For instance, their self-proclaimed messianic vision includes their supplanting the present legal Israeli Jewish regime. We can fully appreciate the concern and anxiety that Israel and Jews have given this peculiar ideology.'' As for the specific allegations of mistreatment of members, Mr.  Allen said: ''We have heard reports. We have no means by which we can validate or disprove those allegations. But we are certainly concerned and we suggest that there may be basis for further inquiry. The Israeli Government and any other government must be concerned about the human and civil rights of any residents and citizens.''"
