"President Hosni Mubarak dismissed his Interior Minister today in what seemed intended as a show of increased authority. The announcement signaled the most dramatic change of the political lineup here in months. A presidential decree announcing that the Interior Minister, Zaki Badr, had been replaced by a police official, Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa, gave no explanation for the dismissal. But Egyptian commentators linked the move to coarse outbursts by the hard-line Interior Minister against newspaper columnists, writers, opposition figures and Islamic scholars. The outbursts were reported this week. ''Is this the position of the Government? Is this how the state is going treat us?'' a commentator, Mustafa Amin, said in an editorial today, referring to what he said were reports that Mr. Badr had ordered assaults on Egyptian men with beards, the usual emblem of Islamic fundamentalism. Accused of Going Too Far ''I think our political theater has gone too far,'' said Ahmed Baha Ed-Din, another commentator, comparing Mr. Badr to actors departing from the scripts that they were supposed to follow. Mr. Badr had led the Government's crackdown against Islamic fundamentalists and had sanctioned tough measures against thousands of detainees. The measures brought outcries from Egyptian and foreign human rights groups about police behavior and reports of torture. He had also scuffled in Parliament with opposition legislators accusing his ministry of human rights abuses and was known for his ready recourse to obscene language about his adversaries. The authorities said last month that he had been the target of a car-bomb attack in Cairo, but the circumstances are unclear. This week an opposition newspaper began a chorus of calls for the resignation of the 53-year-old Mr. Badr when it published a report on a meeting he addressed in a provincial town. There, he was said to have used crude epithets to describe opposition politicians and newspaper commentators, including those who questioned his activities in today's official press. Held Office Since 1986 Some diplomats said today's newspaper commentaries may have been intended to prepare Egyptians for the announcement of Mr. Badr's dismissal, a move that many Egyptians seemed to welcome in private conversations. Since 1986, when he took office, Mr. Badr has acted as Mr. Mubarak's iron fist in the official campaign against purported cells of Islamic militants from the organization that assassinated President Anwar el-Sadat in 1981. He was once quoted as saying he viewed Islamic extremists as ''mad dogs, with all respect to dogs.'' The Minister made widespread use of the emergency powers in force since then to jail adversaries without trial. The authorities have pursued a two-track approach to fundamentalism in Egypt, the most populous nation in the Arab world and Washington's most prominent Arab ally in Middle East diplomacy. While those fundamentalists ready to renounce violence are tolerated, those seeking the violent overthrow of the secular Government faced constant harassment and pressure from Mr. Badr's ministry and from the police forces under its command. Western diplomats said the policy was likely to continue, possibly in a less flamboyant manner, under his successor, Mr. Moussa. Before his appointment to the Interior Ministry, Mr. Moussa was Governor of Asyut, one of Egypt's most troubled provinces, where Islamic fundamentalism has deep roots. Last month hundreds of people were detained after street battles between the police and Islamic protesters there. New Assertiveness Seen Mr. Moussa, 59 years old, has also worked as the head of the Interior Ministry's public security department, until October 1987. Mr. Mubarak took office after the assassination of Mr. Sadat and has since been seen as a cautious figure, relying on aides to carry out his policies, in contrast to the styles of his predecessors, Mr. Sadat and Nasser. Last year, however, the President dismissed his powerful Defense Minister, Mohammed Abdel Halim Abu Ghazala, showing what diplomats depicted as a new assertiveness. But Western financiers have registered concern at Mr. Mubarak's increasing desire to take charge of all decision-making, saying it slows the already ponderous process of economic change that Cairo is pursuing in inconclusive negotiations with the International Monetary Fund."
