"The torture of political detainees in Turkey continues to be ''widespread and systematic,'' under the Government of President Kenan Evren, according to a report released Monday night by a group that monitors human rights violations. The group, Amnesty International, said the methods and tools used by the police had been consistently practiced on thousands of prisoners held under all administrations since the early 1970's. The report said, ''Turkish press reports last year suggested that nearly 180,000 political prisoners had been held at some stage'' since 1980. Few Said to Elude Ill-Treatment The report said that ''very few detainees are not subjected to some form of ill-treatment in police stations, security forces' interrogation and detention centres and prisons.'' General Evren seized power in a military coup in September 1980. Included in the 76-page report is the detailed testimony, given in 1984, of seven women and six men who said the police had used electric shocks, beating of the soles of the feet, burning with cigarettes, hangings for long periods of time, assaults with truncheons and assaults on their sexual organs. ''This issue has a been going on for some time and we have made our views clear,'' said Turan Akin, First Secretary of the Turkish Embassy, who deals with human rights. ''There have been certain allegations and most of them have been factually erroneous.'' Official Sees 'Certain Excesses' He said that he knew of ''certain excesses'' and that many had been brought to the attention of the Turkish authorities. He said that as far as he knew, 105 people had received prison terms, usually three to five years, since 1980. Though the information was gained mostly from political prisoners who were not allowed to notify or contact anyone, Amnesty International said the methods of torture appeared to be used on criminal suspects as well. In response, Mr. Akin said: ''We don't accept the fact that there is incommunicado detention in Turkey. We challenge that term because the families are notified.'' Amnesty International's report said the reports of torture in Turkey increased as the number of people detained increased. It said its concern over torture dated back to before the coup. IN a period of military intervention from 1970 to 1973, when thousands of people were detained, Amnesty International said it had received hundreds of allegations of torture. Thousands of Cases Reported The group said it based its findings on thousands of reports from prisoners held from the early 1970's to the time of the report's writing in May. The group studied accounts of courtroom statements by prisoners who said they had been tortured, and it examined press photographs that showed prisoners' physical condition. Amnesty International said that in the last five years it had submitted the names of more than 100 people who were said to have died in custody. It said it had received information about 82 of them."
