"Dedi Zucker did not expect that founding the only Israeli organization that monitors human rights abuses in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip would help bring threats to his life by angry Jewish mobs. A convivial legislator who belongs to the liberal Citizens Rights Party, Mr. Zucker quickly learned how deeply many Israelis feel about his fight to protect Palestinian human rights. Last July, more than 150 angry Israelis stormed outside his home, throwing stones and chanting ''Arab lover!'' and ''Death to the Arabs!'' A short while earlier, a Palestinian had grabbed the steering wheel of a bus traveling along the Jerusalem-Tel Aviv highway, plunging it into a ravine and killing 16 people. And with the publicity the founding of his group had generated a short time earlier, Mr. Zucker instantly became a target of rightist Israeli fury. Nevertheless, Mr. Zucker has not been deterred. In fact, he says he was convinced more than ever that his group, called B'Tzelem, must continue to catalogue and publicize Israeli human rights violations - improper jailings, destruction of property, beatings and death - in the occupied territories. 'The Business of Democracy' ''I'm convinced there must be an alternative checking of every Palestinian casualty,'' Mr. Zucker said. ''No one should allow the state to be the only source of information. It should be checked and challenged. That's what the business of democracy is.'' Until B'Tzelem began monitoring army reports on clashes in the occupied territories, the Israeli public had to depend solely on the army spokesman, international human rights groups, or Palestinian accounts. After more than two years of reporting on the uprising, it is now an accepted fact that the army routinely minimizes reports of abuses by its soldiers. Even a well-informed army official, who declined to be identified, acknowledged that reports of field officers are not always completely accurate and that the inaccuracies have reduced the credibility of the spokesman's office. Last month, ABC News broadcast a report that showed videotape of Israeli troops in Bethlehem firing without warning directly at fleeing Palestinian demonstrators, hitting one of them in the back of the head. The young man died later. As the ABC piece showed this tape, it simultaneously aired a translation of an army spokesman's account of the incident, saying the soldiers had merely yelled warnings and fired into the air, or at the legs of the demonstrators. #2 Policemen Face Trial As the result of another investigation, the army announced on Sunday evening that two border policemen involved in the incident were suspended from duty and will be tried for violating firing orders and falsifying a report. ''The army spokesman can't be an eyewitness every time a Palestinian is killed,'' Nachman Shai, the head of the army spokesman's office, said on Sunday. ''We are entirely dependent on the reports of soldiers and officers in the field.'' Whenever a Palestinian is shot and killed in a clash with soldiers, the army says it fully investigates to insure that army firing regulations were followed. But the investigations often take months if not a year to complete. Soldiers who are tried usually get light sentences or are quietly disciplined in military hearings. In fact, the Israeli Supreme Court recently ordered the army's chief prosecuting attorney to reverse his decision not to charge an army colonel who ordered his soldiers to break the hands and legs of Palestinian men and women. Mr. Zucker decided he could not count on the Government to provide an accurate record. He set up B'Tzelem which now operates with a handful of volunteers and a small staff. Daily, it compiles statistics on Palestinians killed by Israeli soliders and settlers while also tracking deportations, arrests, and house demolitions. In addition, the organization reports on abuses in the Israeli military judicial system and a host of other problems. Source of Funds ''B'tzelem filled a vacuum,'' said Elliot Appel, 24, a paid intern who recently graduated from the University of Michigan. The organization operates on $125,000 a year donated by private foundations and donations. Less than a year old, it is already attracting international attention. Late last year, a $100,000 Carter Award for Human Rights was divided between B'Tzelem and Al Haq - Law in the Service of Man, a Ramallah-based Palestinian human rights organization. B'Tzelem is a Hebrew word that appears in Genesis 1:27 meaning ''in the image of.'' The full verse reads, ''So God created man in His own image, in the image of God He created him.'' ''Israelis don't want to know what's going on in the occupied territories,'' said Zehava Golan, the woman who runs B'Tzelem. ''We don't want to be only a center collecting data, but to make the Israeli public aware of the abuses.'' ''People say, 'Why do you bother with Palestinian problems? We have enough problems in Israel,' '' she says. ''But, there is a basic standard of human rights that we have to protect. It can be in Sri Lanka, Chile, or anywhere.'' Criticism From Right But some people from the Israeli right say B'Tzelem is not a neutral organization, and that it has its own agenda of promoting the views of Mr. Zucker. He advocates withdrawal from most if not all of the territories, negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organziation and the eventual establishment of a Palestinian state. ''B'Tzelem is playing into the hands of the enemy,'' said Elyakim Haetzni, a member of Parliament from the far right-wing Tehiya party. ''In a normal state, any such type of activity wouldn't be allowed,'' he added. ''I don't think the British established an organization like B'Tzelem to protect the citizens of Hamburg when they bombed it.'' Rabbi Dov Berkovitz, a member of the West Bank settlers council said he believes B'Tzelem is doing important work but needs to be more balanced. ''It's very important that there should be a systemic supervision on exactly what the damage, the casualties are in the uprising,'' said Mr. Berkovitz, who lives in the West Bank settlement of Shilo. ''Unfortunately, there are too many people in the country who have put the intifada in a little drawer someplace like the American mentality in the Vietnam War.'' But, Mr. Berkovitz says, B'Tzelem should not report on Israeli human rights violations without document Palestinian abuses, too. That, he says, is the only way the new human rights organization will ever have an impact on Israeli public opinion."
