"The United Nations issued a report on human rights in Iran on Tuesday, and Western diplomats, Iranian opposition groups and human-rights advocates immediately criticized it, saying it failed to document widespread torture and executions carried out by the Government of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. The 10-page report, prepared by Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, a lawyer and former diplomat from El Salvador, deals exclusively with his efforts to persuade the Iranian Government to allow him access to the country to investigate accusations of abuses. It contains no details of human rights violations. ''A report without any facts or conclusions is outrageous,'' said Michael Posner, executive director of the New York-based Lawyers' Committee for Human Rights. ''If the United Nations wants to be viewed as a moral authority or a credible international body, it cannot present a human rights report on Iran without concluding that there has been a breakdown of the rule of law and that torture and violence is widespread.'' Western diplomats said the report this year was even less complete than last year's report, which was also widely criticized for its lack of detail and analysis but which did say that widespread accusations of executions and torture ''cannot be dismissed.'' Press Reports Cited One diplomat who closely follows events in Iran said he could put together a more credible report simply by compiling reports of arrests, punishments and executions from the official Iranian press and from quoting Iranian officials. ''You can quote Khomeini himself on human rights violations,'' he said. The People's Mujahedeen, a leading Iranian exile group, issued a statement that said, ''The report, despite irrefutable documents and evidence presented, does not accurately portray this blood bath'' in Iran. The Mujahedeen organization has provided the United Nations with hundreds of pages of documents that it says prove widespread human rights abuses. Although many of the Mujahedeen's statements are considered exaggerated, other human rights bodies have extensively detailed human rights abuses in Iran. The 1986 Amnesty International report on Iran expressed concern for ''the continuing, large-scale executions of prisoners for both political and nonpolitical offenses, following summary trials with no defense counsel and no right of appeal,'' as well as the use of flogging and amputation as judicial punishments. The 1985 State Department report on human rights in Iran told of hundreds of summary executions each year and torture in prisons and Government houses, including beating, blindfolding and mock execution. Author Responds to Critics Responding to criticism of his report, Mr. Galindo Pohl, reached by telephone in Guatemala, said he had not had sufficient time to prepare a full report, but that he hoped to present a fuller version to the Commission on Human Rights at the beginning of next year. When asked why he did not include reports from human rights organizations or at least mention some of the conclusions of last year's report, he replied: ''I didn't want a patchwork. I didn't want to be misleading.'' Mr. Galindo Pohl was only assigned the Iran report last July, United Nations officials said. Some human rights specialists said the Iran report illustrates the larger problem of how the United Nations handles human rights issues. Only a few countries are singled out for criticism every year while reported abuses in the majority of member nations are not commented upon. Speakers in the General Assembly often complain that the country reports vary widely in quality because they depend on the personalities and backgrounds of the individuals who prepare reports. They add that some people who prepare reports behave more as diplomats trying to negotiate with governments than as critics."
