"Speaking to Afghan refugees here, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright today issued her harshest criticism of the Taliban movement that rules most of Afghanistan, calling its treatment of women and children ""despicable."" At the desolate mud-brick camp for 80,000 Afghan refugees, 25 miles from the Afghan border, Ms. Albright spoke proudly of her own experience as a wartime refugee who rose to become the first woman to serve as Secretary of State. She urged the young Afghan women and students, listening attentively in their flowing head scarves and long trousers, to take charge of their lives, demand education for themselves and seek equality in their society. ""It is impossible to modernize a nation if half or more of the population is left behind,"" Ms. Albright said at the Bibi Mariam school for girls at the camp, which is helped by American aid provided through the International Rescue Committee. ""If a society is to move forward, women and girls must have access to schools, be able to participate in the economy and be protected from physical exploitation and abuse."" The Taliban, which began as a movement of fundamentalist Islamic religious students in Afghanistan's villages, took over Kabul, the Afghan capital, in September 1996, but has been unable to seize the northern part of the country. Although American officials welcomed the initial stability in Kabul, they were appalled by the abuses of human rights by the Taliban, and the State Department's tone has grown increasingly condemnatory. Pakistan has recognized the Taliban, and the country's security services provide important help to the movement. Asked by a Pakistani journalist in Islamabad this morning why Washington would not recognize the Taliban, Ms. Albright said bluntly: ""It's very clear why we're opposed to Taliban. We're opposed to their approach to human rights, to their despicable treatment of women and children and their lack of respect for human dignity, in a way more reminiscent of the past than the future."" Asked if Ms. Albright's comments embarrassed Pakistan, a senior minister, emphasizing that he was speaking unofficially, said that ""it is no great problem in Pakistan, but what we don't know is what the reaction will be over there,"" pointing to the mountains beyond which Afghanistan lies. But both Pakistan and the United States support a United Nations mediation effort to try to form a coalition government that might last and bring the Afghan civil war to an end. Of the three million Afghan refugees who entered Pakistan from 1979 onward, about half returned after the fall of the Communist Government, American officials said. But 100,000 more refugees have come since the fall of Kabul to the Taliban, and the bulk of the women Ms. Albright spoke to today had fled Kabul. Some expressed resentment that the United States did not back those opposed to the Taliban before their victory. At the camp, Ms. Albright and two of her top aides, both of them women, met privately with a group of women to ask them about their lives. Given cultural and religious restrictions, only female reporters were allowed into the room to listen, but they provided a description and tape of the meeting to their male colleagues. ""We've had a hard time getting our jobs,"" Ms. Albright said to the 25 or so women and girls in a small mud-brick classroom, ""but not as hard a time as you."" Ms. Albright said that ""American women have been very concerned about Afghan women."" ""We have read about you,"" she said. ""And I especially wanted to come to meet with you and hear your stories."" ""I find that women have the same stories,"" Ms. Albright continued. ""It is very hard for me to sit here and compare myself to you, and I have been very lucky, as have my friends. But I know we are all the same, and we have the same feelings -- we all suffer when we hurt and we all suffer for each other."" ""I have found that when women are given a chance to work and raise children, they can be so brilliant,"" she said. ""Yet so many women are destined to suffer, and we should do all we can to help them."" Dressed conservatively in a long brown jacket and trousers, Ms. Albright concluded by telling the women: ""I hope I can come visit you again -- but come to a Afghanistan where you can live as full equals. We really are all sisters."" The last working visit of a Secretary of State to Pakistan was by George P. Shultz in 1983, although Mr. Shultz also went in 1988 to the funeral of Gen. Mohammed Zia ul-Haq. In conversations with Pakistani officials, Ms. Albright discussed nuclear and missile proliferation and other security questions, Afghanistan and Kashmir, which Ms. Albright said she hoped would be settled in her lifetime. She also discussed the 38 F-16's that Pakistan bought from the United States but never received, an issue Foreign Minister Gohar Ayub Khana called ""a matter of critical importance to our people."" The Pakistanis paid for the planes, which were built. But before delivery, President Bush told Congress he could not certify that Pakistan did not possess a nuclear weapon. Under the so-called Pressler Amendment, intended to discourage nuclear proliferation, the planes could not be delivered. But the United States has been unable to sell them elsewhere and return the proceeds to Pakistan. A deal to sell them to Indonesia was blocked late last year by Congress, which criticized that cpountry's human-rights record. Ms. Albright also urged the Pakistanis to find those responsible for the killing of four American oil workers and their Pakistani driver last week in Karachi. The murders made her insistent on going ahead with her visit to Pakistan despite other pressing business surrounding Iraq, her aides said. But her long-planned visit here was shortened by her diplomatic shuttling around to deal with the Iraq crisis, and her trip to India will be shortened as well. A visit to Bangladesh was canceled altogether. From India, she may fly back to Western Europe to meet on Iraq with other foreign ministers, but officials said that no firm plans had been made."
