"Israel was created in response to savage inhumanity, and more than most countries it avows humane ideals. Perhaps understandably, then, any criticism of Israel for violating human rights touches sensitive feelings. Some supporters find denial easier than looking at the facts. A recent example was an advertisement by an organization that calls itself Flame, Facts and Logic About the Middle East. The ad took what it called ''a factual look at Israel, the Arabs and human rights.'' But the text was a sorry evasion of reality. ''Israel is bitterly denounced and condemned,'' the advertisement said, ''for having deported a handful of Palestinians, who were convicted of crimes against public order.'' In fact, the dozens of Palestinians deported by Israel were not tried at all, much less ''convicted.'' The U.S. State Department's country report on human rights this year said: ''The deportation process is characterized by a lack of formal charges and the use of secret evidence not disclosed to the suspect or his attorney.'' By way of defending Israel, the advertisement said that Arab countries deport Palestinians in large numbers. That is true, and deplorable. But there is a deep difference. When Israeli soldiers take a Palestinian from the West Bank or Gaza and drop him in Lebanon, they are deporting him from his own country. The people who wrote that ad would surely be outraged if an American citizen were picked up in New York or Chicago and expelled from the United States. How can they not understand when Palestinians are the victims? It must be because they think of Palestinians as less entitled to human rights - or less entitled to think of a place where they have lived for hundreds of years as home. The same blindness was evident when the advertisement spoke of Israel as ''a democratic country, with a freely elected Government that is fully responsible to its citizens for its actions.'' But in the occupied territories Palestinians cannot vote. Israel governs by force, not democratic legitimacy. Finally, the advertisement defended the record of the Israel Defense Force in handling the intifada, the Palestinian uprising. Every improper military killing or act of violence, it said, ''is investigated, prosecuted and punished.'' A report just issued by Middle East Watch, an affiliate of the New York-based organization Human Rights Watch, examines Israel's handling of shootings and violence by soldiers in the West Bank and Gaza. It concludes that ''Israeli policies all too often encouraged a lack of restraint by I.D.F. troops.'' Middle East Watch examined the 450 killings by Israeli forces in the first 19 months of the intifada, through June 1989. (There have been 220 more killings since then.) It found that investigations were grossly inadequate and courts-martial infrequent. The report said it believed that the few courts-martial ''represent only a small portion of fatal incidents in which there is prima facie evidence - credible eyewitness testimony in particular, but also medical evidence in some cases - that soldiers exceeded their open-fire orders.'' As for punishment, the sentences for soldiers court-martialed in cases of killings range from a reprimand to prison sentences of two months to two years. The report said: ''No case resulted in a prison sentence commensurate with what would ordinarily be considered appropriate for the willful commission of a serious crime of violence.'' The point of all this is not to suggest that Israel live up to some impossibly angelic standard of human rights. It is that Israel live up to its own standards. The Flame advertisement said that if any human rights violations occur in Israel, ''they are swiftly prosecuted and punished.'' How much wiser it would be if organizations supporting Israel encouraged that high standard by recognizing violations instead of denying the undeniable. How much wiser, and how much better for Israel's safety. The subliminal message of propaganda like that advertisement, and I suppose its real purpose, is to argue that Israel can hold on to the occupied territories and still deserve the world's admiration. It can deny people the vote, deport protesters from their own country and still be a light unto the nations. That is not just foolish advice; it is fatal. There is no way to be a humane, idealistic country while suppressing another people. There is no way that refusing to deal with the Palestinians as another group of human beings entitled to rights and respect can bring Israel the peace it deserves."
