"The General Assembly voted overwhelmingly today to condemn Israel for its repression of the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories. Only the United States and Israel voted against a resolution introduced by the Arab countries on behalf of the Palestine Liberation Organization. It calls on Israel to halt violations of Palestinians' human rights and asks the United Nations Secretary General, Javier Perez de Cuellar, to report on the situation in the territories as soon as possible. It also asks the Security Council to consider ''with urgency'' measures to ''provide international protection to the Palestinian civilians'' in the occupied territories. Human Rights Violations Alleged The resolution ''condemns Israel's persistent policies and practices violating the human rights of the Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian territories,'' notably by shooting civilians, beating rioters and confiscating and destroying their property. The resolution was supported by 140 of the United Nations' 159 member countries. While the United States and Israel opposed the measure, there were six abstentions: Uruguay, Zaire, El Salvador and the Caribbean nations of St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Antigua and Barbuda, and Grenada. Eleven countries were not present for the vote. Explaining the American vote afterward, Alexander F. Watson, the United States deputy permanent representative, called the resolution ''one-sided'' and said it served only to ''deepen divisions, harden positions and poison the atmosphere.'' Speaking before the vote, Israel's United Nations Ambassador, Johanan Bein, said the resolution was aimed at blocking the Middle East peace process and showed that the ''new climate'' of global cooperation ''is irrelevent as far as the Arab conflict with Israel is concerned.'' The adoption of the resolution was unusual because it came during the Assembly's opening general debate, which ended its second week today. That is the time when member countries set out their views on the world's problems; specific issues like the Palestinian question are normally taken up later. But diplomats said the Arab League countries used their political influence to interrupt the general debate as a means of attracting attention to the P.L.O.'s complaints. Others Who Spoke Other speakers who addressed the General Assembly today were Vladimir A. Kravets, the Foreign Minister of the Ukraine, and Nicaragua's delegate to the United Nations, Alejandro Serrano Caldera, who spoke of ''well-founded optimism'' about the prospects for peace and democracy in his country. Also addressing the assembly were the Foreign Minister of the Seychelles, Danielle de St. Jorre; the Foreign Minister of Morocco, Abdellatif Filali; the Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Yemen, Abdul Karim al-Iryani; the Foreign Minister of Zimbabwe, Nathan Shamuyarira; the Foreign Minister of Qatar, Abdullah Bin Khalifa; the Burmese Deputy Foreign Minister, U Ohn Gyaw, and the Foreign Minister of Belize, Said Musa."
