"War Crimes Trial Forces France to Face Its Past Maurice Papon, 87, a former French official, will go on trial on Wednesday in Bordeaux on charges of complicity in Nazi crimes against humanity by ordering the deportation to death camps of 1,560 Jews during World War II. He will be the highest-ranking French official during the German occupation to go on trial on charges of complicity in crimes against humanity, and only the second French citizen to be tried on those grounds since World War II. The case is forcing France to confront the wartime role of anonymous civil servants and other French functionaries.   A1 Failed Attack Angers Israelis After four days of silence about allegations of a botched Israeli assassination attempt against a Hamas leader in Jordan, Israelis loosed a fierce barrage of accusations against Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu for a debacle that stood to seriously damage Israel on every political and security front. The Israeli Cabinet, while avoiding direct comment on the situation, sought to justify the operation.   A1 Pope Ends Visit to Brazil Pope John Paul II wrapped up his visit to Brazil with an open-air Mass in Rio de Janeiro that drew an estimated two million people and seemed to rival the increasingly popular television evangelists for color and splash, while maintaining the Catholic church's traditional focus on the inviolability of the family.   A3 A U.N. Official's Difficult Task Mary Robinson, 53, who resigned as President of Ireland last month, has been the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for barely three weeks, but she has been busy: soothing China, reacting calmly to Afghanistan and warning the Democratic Republic of Congo, the former Zaire. She has already come under attack for remarks that angered Algeria.   A10 Congo Warns Aid Agencies Two days after expelling some United Nations workers, the Government of Congo said that it was considering closing down several other refugee agencies in eastern Congo. Interior Minister Mwenze Kongolo told reporters that the office of the United Nations Commissioner for Human Rights has ""begun to put its nose in the political activities in our country.""   A8 North Korea Food Crisis Eases International food aid has staved off catastrophe in North Korea, at least for now, but the country will need twice as much assistance next year, a senior United Nations official said.   (Reuters) 'War Council' in Colombia President Ernesto Samper of Colombia summoned a ""war council"" of top military leaders after 28 policemen, soldiers and judicial officials were killed within 24 hours in separate attacks by leftist and rightist gunmen. Mr. Samper ruled out the possibility of declaring a state of internal emergency.   (Reuters) G.O.P. Says Videotapes Fuel Case Against Clinton Republicans seized on videotapes showing President Clinton greeting donors at coffees before the 1996 election as evidence that Attorney General Janet Reno acted too hastily last week when she cleared him of several allegations of campaign finance abuses. The White House has insisted that the coffees were not fund-raising events. But a tape of one coffee seemed to suggest that some donors thought otherwise, as the Democratic Party's national chairman could be heard refusing an offer of five checks.   A1 A Case of Corporate Hardball As a vote approaches on whether Cashmere, Wash., should give in to demands by a candy company to make its main product the town theme, the showdown has some residents lashing out against what they call corporate bullying. In essence, the maker of Aplets and Cotlets wants Cashmere turned into an advertising arm of the company, renaming its streets and changing its highway signs.   A1 Global Warming on the Table The debate over what to do about global warming has shifted to the question of how restricting emissions of heat-trapping greenhouse gases might affect the economy. Climate change, in all its complexity, will be under the spotlight today at a conference in Washington.   A1 Holy Cow, Dog, Gerbil. . . Georgia listened to prayers at the Cathedral of St. Philip in Atlanta on a day reserved for the blessing of the animals. Dogs, cats, rabbits, gerbils, even an elephant were blessed as churches around the country celebrated the feast day of St. Francis of Assisi, who taught that all creation was sacred and who, legend says, talked to the animals.   A12 New Term for Supreme Court The new Supreme Court term opens today, bringing the Justices their most important affirmative action case in years, an employment dispute that could rewrite the ground rules for taking race into account in both public and private workplaces. This case is one of 59 cases the Court has agreed so far to review. There are few potential landmarks on the docket so far, but the cases present issues as diverse as sex discrimination in Federal immigration law and the First Amendment implications of excluding minor-party candidates from campaign debates on public television.   A13 Clinton Plans Veto Session President Clinton plans to wield his veto pen today for the second time by crossing out as many as 50 pet projects worth about $300 million in the $9.2 billion military construction bill, White House officials said. Mr. Clinton intends to veto 30 to 50 projects added by members of Congress for items like child-care centers and improvements for runways and barracks.   A16 Corruption Punished More Than Police Brutality Internal Police Department documents show that New York officers are most often dismissed not for brutality but for overt, nonviolent acts of criminality or corruption, like selling steroids. In the year and half that Howard Safir has been Police Commissioner, only eight officers have lost their jobs for using excessive force. Police officials say this stems partly from the difficulty in judging when officers go too far. Critics say it reflects a greater hesitancy to punish officers for brutality than for corruption.   A1 A County's Growing Pains One hundred developers and landowners, 98 percent of them from Putnam County, have filed a lawsuit charging that New York City's tight watershed regulations are taking away their property and development rights. It is an indication of how worried many residents are about the county's rapid growth.   B1 Letter Angers Messinger Ruth W. Messinger accused Mayor Giuliani of orchestrating ""an attack by one Jew against another Jew"" after a political ally of the Mayor, Jules Polonetsky, wrote a letter to a Jewish newspaper describing the prospect of a Messinger mayoralty as ""our worst nightmare."" Within hours after Ms. Messinger made her remarks, Mr. Polonetsky apologized for having ""characterized my opposition to Ms. Messinger in terms of only one community.""   B1 Yale Celebrates Prosperity With the completion of its $1.5 billion fund drive last week, Yale University is celebrating a turnaround. At the start of the campaign, in 1992, Yale was running a $12 million deficit and faculty members were angry over a plan to shrink their numbers. Now, having raised $200 million more than the goal, Yale is prospering.   B4 Trash Dispute in New Jersey In May, a Federal appeals court found that New Jersey's longstanding control over garbage disposal was anti-competitive, so counties have struck out on their own to make cheaper arrangements. New Jersey officials appealed to the Supreme Court, which begins its new term today, but they do not expect the Court to take up the case.   B2 A. L. Rowse The brilliant authority on Shakespeare and Elizabethan England, best known for his confident identification of the Dark Lady of Shakespeare's sonnets as Emilia Bassano Lanier, the daughter of an Italian court musician, was 93.   B7 Lyman T. Johnson A grandson of slaves and the plaintiff in a lawsuit that led to the integration of the University of Kentucky in 1949, five years before the Supreme Court paved the way for the desegregation of all public schools in Brown v. Board of Education, was 91.   B7 FCC in Lame-Duck Status The chairman of the Federal Communications Commission has announced that the panel will not consider two highly visible matters before it, because President Clinton's nominee for the next chairman is still being considered and the makeup of the panel could change.   D1 Changes Urged in Bank Rules The chairman of the Federal Reserve called for an overhaul in Federal rules so banks could keep pace with technology, but he said the changes should come slowly so as not to upset the banking system and the economy.   D2 AOL to Revise Services Starting next week, America Online will begin overhauling its service in an effort to attract another 2 million to 3 million subscribers during the next year. The revised service will include a streamlined group of more prominently displayed ""channels,"" each based on subjects of interest like sports. In addition, the featured offerings on America Online will be revised six times a day.   D6 Business Digest   D1 Editorials: The Supreme Court returns; the plane train, on track; Robert B. Semple Jr. on global warming. Columns: Anthony Lewis, Thomas L. Friedman. Bridge   E8 Chronicle   B6 Crossword   E8 Weather   D14"
