"To the Editor: The July 7 letter from Ambassador Nizar Hamdoon of Iraq is a pathetic attempt to deny what he knows is true: that he represents a Government that is strangling, burning and breaking the bones of helpless children, women and men in its prisons. Well before he wrote his letter, the Ambassador and his Government were informed of detailed reports received by Amnesty International: that 300 children 10 to 14 years old had been arrested in Sulaimaniya, Iraq, in late September and early October 1985; that many of them had relatives who opposed the Government, and that three of them were reportedly tortured to death, their bodies found in the street. Also in October, reports were received that eight adults were buried alive in Sulaimaniya cemetery. Ambassador Hamdoon has received page after page of information on torture by his Government, such as that of Robert Spurling, an American whose claim of torture was supported by a medical examination after he had left the country. A student released last year stated he had been beaten on the head until his nose broke, frozen in a refrigerator, burned with cigarettes and hot irons and sexually abused. Then, as he testified, ''members of my family - mother (73 years old), three sisters and three brothers with five children aged between 5 and 13 - were arrested and brought in front of me. They were subjected to falaqa beatings [on the soles of the feet] and electric shocks. Also, my sisters and mother were undressed and insulted in front of me. Even once they burned the pubic hair of my mother and sisters while I was present.'' Another report tells of infants put in cells next to their parents. The guards ''deprive [them of] milk in order to force [the] parents to confess.'' Iraqi authorities blandly deny this and regularly declare their Government's devotion to human rights. Ambassador Hamdoon does not indicate that this incident or the reports of torture and killing were ever investigated. At one point, Iraqi authorities offered to investigate Amnesty International's torture reports - if we would return the victims to Iraq. The U.S. Government is committed by law to use its power against torture. The State Department's most recent report observes that in Iraq ''it is unlikely that torture could be practiced without authorizaton of senior officials.'' This month, Amnesty International learned that Iraqi security forces killed 21 people in Sulaimaniya and Arbil this year, including 15 high school and college students, and that six boys under 18 were executed in the square outside Sulaimaniya prison on April 9, reportedly in retaliation for the attempted assassination of a Government official. As Ambassador Hamdoon continues to go about his business in Washington, it is time for Americans to call him to account. For the abducted children in Iraq, whose fate the Government has failed to clarify, it may be the only hope left. JAMES DAVID BARBER Chairman, Amnesty International U.S.A.   New York, July 24, 1986"
