"While strongly criticizing the Iraqi Government for its human rights record and foreign policy, a senior Bush Administration official urged Congress today to resist growing sentiment among legislators to apply economic sanctions against the Government of President Saddam Hussein. The official, John H. Kelly, the Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, said sanctions would worsen the American trade deficit without furthering United States interests in the Middle East. ''It would be the American farmer and the American exporter who would, in effect, be punished,'' he told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. ''The Iraqis would be able to purchase the same kinds of goods and products elsewhere on the world market.'' But Mr. Kelly faced sharp skepticism from Republican and Democratic members, who suggested that sanctions were necessary to demonstrate Washington's displeasure with Iraq's use of poison gas and torture against its citizens and with its threats to attack Israel with chemical weapons. 'To Send a Message' ''I think some type of sanctions are necessary to send a message,'' said Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas. ''It would hurt wheat sales in Kansas, that's true. But sometimes we have to stand up and be counted.'' She said ''it just makes me weep to think we are not doing more'' to protest Iraqi human rights violations. Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, who also testified before the committee, said, ''America should not subsidize a terrorist nation.'' Mr. D'Amato has introduced a bill, which appears to be gaining support in the Senate, that would impose trade sanctions on Iraq and end all grants, loans, credits, guarantees and insurance to it. Iraq, which has the second-largest oil reserves in the world after Saudi Arabia, is an important American trading partner. The United States buys an average of 447,000 barrels of Iraqi oil a day, amounting to about $2 billion a year. Last year, the United States exported $1 billion in agricultural products, including rice, wheat and meat to Iraq. Iraq recently requested a $500 million payment guarantee from the Commodity Credit Corporation, an Agriculture Department agency that guarantees loan payments, enabling foreign purchasers of American products to obtain bank financing."
