"Talking Peace A Vision for the Next Generation By Jimmy Carter Illustrated. 192 pages. Dutton Children's Books. $16.99. The other day Jimmy Carter was in the Sudan to mediate the civil war there. Then he was off for a meeting in Kenya to encourage increased relief operations by the United Nations in Somalia. Since departing the White House in 1981, he has left the impression that there are several Jimmy Carters, all running around the world supervising free elections, helping to build houses for the poor, Johnny Appleseed-ing crops in drought areas and promoting human rights. Of the five living ex-Presidents, Mr. Carter is the only one who doesn't appear to be devoting his energies to riding, golfing or rewriting his history. ""Talking Peace,"" his latest book, is addressed to young people. It does conclude with some rather obvious suggestions about going to the library, discussing the news with teachers, family and friends and keeping a journal of current events. But the book is more than an Eagle Scout's call for good citizenship. Actually, it's a primer that should appeal to any reader trying to keep track of today's expanding list of warring countries. ""As of early 1993,"" Mr. Carter writes, ""about 34 major armed conflicts were under way around the world."" How does he define a major armed conflict? ""In each of these, at least 1,000 battle-related deaths had taken place."" From Europe to South America, Mr. Carter leapfrogs the continents, providing helpful maps, charts and text to explain the reasons behind the civil and regional wars for independence and control of governments. In its country-by-country roundup, ""Talking Peace"" also emphasizes the subject of human rights, the bench mark of the Carter Administration's foreign policy. The picture he draws of human-rights abuses in many lands is discouraging, but he continues to be optimistic about the possibility of change. ""Human rights invented America,"" Mr. Carter writes, and the United States should set an example for other free nations by speaking out against abuses: ""Since the President is, in effect, the voice of our country, oppressed peoples around the world most fear silence from our White House."" The heart of ""Talking Peace"" is Mr. Carter's effort at mediation. He begins with an inside account of his biggest triumph: the 1978 Camp David accords between Egypt and Israel, which led to the first treaty ever signed between Israel and an Arab nation. This required all of Mr. Carter's diplomatic skills. He quickly realized that Menachem Begin and Anwar el-Sadat were personally incompatible, and that he had to run the show. ""For the last 10 days of the Camp David negotiations, the two men never spoke to or even saw each other except for a Sunday afternoon trip to the nearby Civil War battlefield at Gettysburg,"" he writes. At one point, the Egyptians packed their bags and prepared to go home. Mr. Carter served as the middleman, speaking to both men separately and cajoling concessions from them in the interests of a settlement. Out of this experience, the Carter Center, affiliated with Emory University in Atlanta, was created in 1982. Instead of simply producing research papers about peace, the center's namesake has gone to the front lines of armed conflict, offering dispute resolution and monitoring democratic elections. The center established an International Negotiation Network to study ways to prevent or end the shooting. Among the members of the network are Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State; Desmond Tutu, the Anglican leader in South Africa, and Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the president of Georgia, the former republic of the Soviet Union. The Carter Center has undertaken other projects that link peace to agricultural training, water purification and immunization against disease. And the center is also developing community programs to help lessen urban warfare on the American landscape. Although the book is basically a study of how to wage peace, now and then the author spots a few killer rabbits rocking the boat on the seas of tranquillity. Mr. Carter's admirers will appreciate his outspoken comments about the small wars conducted by his two successors in the White House, Ronald Reagan and George Bush. Diplomatically, Mr. Carter wonders if the gulf war was necessary: ""We can only guess about what might have happened if a sincere effort had been made to resolve the major issues through negotiation. Was the war truly successful? We must consider that as I write this book, Saddam Hussein is still in power, and Iraq may still have nuclear capabilities. Both during and since the war, Iraqi troops have killed thousands of Kurdish tribespeople, who oppose Saddam's dictatorship and demand their own self-government."" Earlier this year, Mr. Carter wrote ""Turning Point"" (Times Books/Random House), recalling his first political race for the Georgia State Senate, in 1962. Now, in ""Talking Peace,"" the 39th President demonstrates that it's possible to keep growing beyond the White House."
