"Turkish newspapers are increasingly free-wheeling and unafraid to challenge Prime Minister Turgut Ozal. Old taboos are being broken, or at least tested for the first time in years: there is public debate on whether to legalize a Communist party, to give more latitude to Islamic fundamentalists, to abolish the death penalty and to expand cultural rights for the country's large Kurdish minority. Those are some of the enhanced civil liberties many Turks say they have come to enjoy in the more than five years since the army yielded to civilian government. The latest example is the lifting of emergency rules in this city a few weeks ago, a move that marked an end to a series of restrictive measures, including martial law, that had begun with a military coup in 1980. While the change did not affect the daily lives of most Istanbul residents, it nonetheless offered them more freedom to criticize the Government and to organize demonstrations. Human-Rights Abuses Persist Yet serious human-rights problems persist, and they have drawn fresh attention, and attacks, now that Turkey has asked to become a member of the European Community. If the Turkish application is to stand a chance, Western Europeans say, the country must first show that it measures up to their civil-liberties standards. ''There would be a lot less criticism of Turkey if it was not trying to join the club,'' a European diplomat said. Thus far, the Turks fail Europe's test. Although it is more than three years since the end of martial law, military courts continue to try many civilian cases. Limits on free speech, while broadened somewhat, still keep public discourse under wraps. Unions possess limited rights to organize or to strike. Newspapers recognize that their new freedoms extend just so far. One journalist is on trial, facing a possible prison term of 15 years, for an interview with a Kurdish terrorist leader in Syria. Brutality Remains Unchanged In late 1987 two Turkish Communist leaders returned from eight years of self-imposed exile in Western Europe to assess the new standards of tolerance toward left-wing ideology. They were immediately arrested and, they say, tortured. Their trial drags on. Last fall, a wave of hunger strikes swept Turkish prisons as inmates protested their living conditions. Most of all, Turkey remains accused - as it has been for many years - of closing its eyes to police torture of political prisoners and common criminals. The number of cases seems to be down, human-rights advocates say, but the forms of brutality remain unchanged. They include systematic beating, electric-shock torture, sexual assaults, food and sleep deprivation and hanging prisoners upside down. And critics say that though the Ozal Government issues statements deploring such behavior, it has done nothing of substance to make the police stop. ''Although we can say that the situation has changed for the better, the fear continues,'' said Nevzat Helvaci, secretary general of Turkey's Human Rights Association. Pacts Outlawing Torture Two days earlier, Mr. Helvaci said, a young man had reported to the association that his arms were pinned behind him during a recent police interrogation, and he was then hanged from the wrists. The persistence of Turkish police torture was reaffirmed last week by Amnesty International, which said that 250,000 political prisoners have been held in Turkey over the last eight years, and nearly all were tortured. That figure includes many people who were arrested in the period of military rule, from 1980 to 1983. But Turky's human-rights group said that the basic pattern continues under Mr. Ozal, even though Turkey last year signed two agreements outlawing torture -one initiated by the European Convention for the Prevention of Torture, the other by the United Nations. The European covenant, which goes into effect Feb. 1, is considered especially important because it will permit outside inspectors to examine local conditions. In Ankara, Goverment officials acknowledged that injustices exist, but they rejected the notion that brutality is systemic. ''You can't show me a country in the world where human rights is perfect,'' said Kamran Inan, a state minister partly responsible for European relations. ''The question is relative, and we have made great progress.'' Rising Turkish Resentment Mr. Inan reflects a widely held belief here that many foreign accusations against Turkey are motivated by politics and not humanitarian considerations. Resentment rose when no Western country responded recently to Turkish requests for help to feed and house 50,000 Kurdish refugees who had fled across the border from Iraq and asserted that Iraqi troops had attacked their villages with chemical weapons. Western diplomats concede the lack of aid. But they say Turkey is largely to blame because, it an apparent attempt to avoid antagonizing Iraq, it refused to accept the assistance through regular channels such as the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees."
