"The Clinton Administration has increased pressure on Turkey to stop human rights abuses after a state security court convicted eight Kurdish members of Parliament last week of supporting an illegal Kurdish separatist group. In stepping up its criticisms, the Administration is walking a fine line, trying to press Turkey without straining relations to the breaking point. Long one of America's closest allies in the Middle East, Turkey served as an important staging area for Western troops during the Persian Gulf war and provides a base for Western planes to enforce a no-flight zone over Kurdish territory in Iraq. The Administration is pressing Turkey to repeal its special anti-terrorism laws, which give the Government sweeping powers that American officials say are often used to trample on human rights. Administration officials say that in recent months Turkey's human rights situation has taken a significant turn for the worse. The most visible incident, officials say, was the sentencing of the Kurdish lawmakers last week to 3 to 15 years for backing the banned Kurdistan Workers Party, a violent Marxist group known as the PKK, which is waging a guerrilla war to create a separate state in southeast Turkey. The State Department has criticized the verdict, suggesting that the Kurdish lawmakers were convicted for merely speaking out on behalf of their people. Some officials voiced concern that two speeches that the prosecutors cited as improperly supporting the Kurdistan Workers Party were made by parliamentarians to the Carnegie Endowment for Peace and the Helsinki Commission of the United States Congress. ""We're concerned about a number of examples where internationally recognized freedom of speech has been curtailed in Turkey,"" said John Shattuck, Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights. Administration officials also point to the recent indictment of Yavuz Onen, president of Turkey's human rights foundation, after he criticized prison conditions. In addition, a journalist, Mehmet Ali Birand, was sentenced to six months in jail for making a television film in which Turkish soldiers described their military experiences in unflattering terms. The Administration fears that the human rights abuses against the Kurds, who make up about one-sixth of Turkey's 60 million people, could fuel further fighting by the Kurdistan Workers Party. More than 13,000 people have been killed since Kurdish guerrillas began fighting a decade ago. The Administration is urging Prime Minister Tansu Ciller to solve the Kurdish crisis through nonmilitary means. The United States does not favor a separate Kurdish state in Turkey or negotiations with the Kurdistan Workers Party, which the Administration views as a terrorist organization. The group has assassinated dozens of teachers and planted bombs throughout the country."
