"More than four months after Iraq's invasion, Kuwaitis are being subjected to looting, rape, torture and executions, human rights groups, Kuwaiti exiles and other witnesses say. But estimates of the frequency and extent of the abuses are so sharply disputed that the human rights groups, and even some Kuwaitis, say that given the lack of access to Kuwait, they cannot evaluate the remaining population's plight with any certainty. Kuwait and its supporters say at least 7,000 Kuwaitis have been killed and 25,000 arrested or detained since Iraqi troops invaded the country on Aug. 2. By contrast, Middle East Watch, an independent human rights group based in New York, puts the death toll at about 1,000, and arrests and detentions at 5,000, some 3,000 of whom are still being held. Amnesty International, the London-based human rights monitors, confirmed deaths ""in the scores"" and arrests and detentions ""in the hundreds"" in its last report on Kuwait in early October. And while the group is issuing a new report on Wednesday, Amnesty representatives say their estimates are slightly higher than but roughly similar to those of Middle East Watch. Exaggeration Suspected The vast discrepancies in the estimates have given rise to suspicions among some human rights monitors that abuses are being exaggerated, consciously or not, for political purposes. Several human rights monitors said in interviews that they believed that the Bush Administration and Kuwait and its supporters are relying on reports of atrocities to help counter lawmakers, former government officials and foreign policy analysts who favor waiting for economic sanctions to force Iraqi soldiers out of Kuwait. ""My country is being savaged and destroyed, our women subjected to mass acts of rape, our men and even children are being murdered while these armchair analysts advocate waiting a year or up to 18 months for sanctions to force him out,"" Sheik Saud Nasir al-Sabah, Kuwait's Ambassador to the United States, said in an unusually emotional outburst during a recent interview. ""Those who favor letting us suffer might at very least consider calling upon Iraq to permit a human rights observer force to enter Kuwait -- which they have refused to do -- to protect our people there."" Human rights groups agree that atrocities are being committed under Iraqi occupation. And they second Sheik Saud's call for greater access to Kuwait. But they add that given Iraq's refusal to permit on-site inspections in Kuwait by humanitarian groups, they cannot confirm many of reports of ""mass acts"" of rape, torture and execution coming from Kuwaiti sources. ""As a human rights organization, we deplore and would never want to minimize the grave human rights abuses taking place in Kuwait,"" said Andrew Whitley, director of Middle East Watch. ""But neither do we wish to see them overstated or exaggerated in an exercise to whip up war fever."" Iraq has repeatedly denied committing atrocities in Kuwait. But it has also refused to permit journalists or human rights monitors to visit Kuwait to conduct unsupervised interviews and assessments. Moreover, Baghdad has argued that because Kuwait is part of Iraq, it is not bound by the 1949 Geneva Conventions governing rules of war and treatment of prisoners and civilian populations. Propaganda Value Cited What is not disputed is the propaganda value of Iraqi atrocities in Kuwait, where 400,000 people, 200,000 of them Kuwaiti, are struggling to survive under rapidly deteriorating conditions, including scarcity of food and virtually no medicine. The Kuwaiti Government in exile has sent missions across the United States and Europe to highlight these conditions and atrocities. The day before the Security Council voted to authorize the use of force to evict Iraq from Kuwait after Jan. 15, Kuwait made an unusual and moving presentation to the Council on human rights abuses committed by the Iraqi authorities. Using videotaped testimony and giant blowups of photos of torture victims, exiled Kuwaitis told a stunned and silent Security Council about the horrors they said Iraqi soldiers were inflicting on the Kuwaiti people. President Bush, who has likened Saddam Hussein to Hitler, has said Iraqi atrocities in Kuwait are partly responsible for his unwillingness to rely on sanctions to force Iraq out. Rape Case Is Described Iraq's sensitivity to reports of atrocities -- and its ideas about how best to counter such accounts -- were reflected in a recent cablegram filed by an American diplomat in the region. According to an unidentified woman who recently left Saudi Arabia, the cablegram recounts, Iraqi soldiers recently raped a Kuwaiti woman from a prominent family and her two daughters in their fashionable home in a Kuwaiti suburb. Iraqi troops subsequently returned with one of the rapists and announced that a Kuwaiti male member of the family ""would be given a gun to execute the rapist in front of television cameras,"" the cablegram says. Residents of the area believed that the rape was ""staged deliberately in order to arrive at this end point -- a film that can be used to counter the tales of atrocities coming out of Kuwait by showing that the occupation authorities are taking decisive action."" In its last report, Amnesty International said that based on scores of interviews with refugees, it had found a ""horrifying picture of widespread arrests, torture under interrogation, summary executions, and mass extrajudicial killings."" Few informed observers disagree. What is at issue, however, is the number of victims. 250 Executions Confirmed ""Yes, what's happening in Kuwait is terrible and completely unacceptable,"" said Aziz Abu Hamad, a Saudi who conducted many of the more than 600 interviews used in compiling Middle East Watch's detailed 18-page report, issued in November. ""But we simply cannot find persuasive evidence of the thousands of deaths and mass rapes and many of the other abuses on a scale that have been reported in the press."" For instance, he said, he could confirm only about 250 of what Kuwait says were thousands of summary executions. Kuwaiti officials have said Iraq is trying to re-populate their country with Iraqi citizens. But Mr. Aziz and Mr. Whitley said they could not find evidence to support this. While there were some Iraqis who had moved down to join husbands who were soldiers, the Government did not seem to be encouraging a substantial migration, they said. On Nov. 26, they noted, Iraq's Interior Ministry ordered all Iraqi families living in Kuwait to return to Iraq and barred Iraqis from moving to Kuwait. 'Generalized' Rape Unconfirmed A far more sensitive area of disagreement is the issue of rape. Administration and Kuwaiti officials have deplored what one senior American official recently called ""the culture of rape"" under Iraqi occupation. But Mr. Whitley said that although there is no doubt that many women and even girls have been raped, his group could not confirm ""rape as a generalized phenomenon."" A Kuwaiti obstetrician who was brought to the United States by Citizens for a Free Kuwait, a lobbying group, said she had treated four cases of rape in three and a half months of work at Maternity Hospital in Kuwait City. ""It appears to be frequent, but not that frequent,"" she said. What particularly disturbed her, she added, was the difference in the rapes she had treated soon after the invasion and then last month. She treated the first two women in August, she said. Both were married women who were not Kuwaiti, and both had been picked up on the street by Iraqi soldiers. But in early November, she treated two Kuwaiti girls, both unmarried, who had been raped by soldiers who had entered their home at 5 A.M. ""The male members of the family were taken to the first floor of the house and subjected to mock executions, while the girls were raped below them,"" she said, asking that her name be withheld to protect relatives still in Kuwait. ""Their parents could hear their screams but not help them."" Anita Tiessen a spokeswoman for Amnesty International in London, said that though rape reports were increasing recently, they were particularly difficult to document in a country like Kuwait, in which women were expected to be virgins when they married. ""The shame of the event means there is likely to be a lot of underreporting,"" she said. 'Lower Estimates Often Correct' Human rights groups are the first to acknowledge that their estimates are conservative. ""It makes a better headline to use the larger numbers,"" said Kenneth Roth, deputy director of Human Rights Watch, of which Middle East Watch is an affiliate. ""But we find that the lower estimates often prove correct, so to maintain credibility, we report only what we can confirm."" ""The situation in Kuwait makes 'Rashomon' look like a clear story,"" he concluded. ""Without direct access to the country, it is very hard to be sure."" What seems sure, however, is that hundreds of people have been executed -- more by the security police and military intelligence than by soldiers -- in detention centers, in public, or in front of their families. An Administration official said human rights monitors in the Government tended to believe the human rights groups' estimates rather than those of the Kuwaiti Government. ""We can't accuse them of lying,"" the official said. ""But this is a highly emotional situation, and it's very hard to be cool and objective."" Atrocity reports inolving occupied territories have frequently been incorrect. In 1914, for example, the Germans were falsely accused by the Allies of murdering Belgian babies at the outset of World War I; in World War II many diplomats said reports of German atrocities against the Jews were exaggerated. A front-page article on Dec. 16 discussed reports of Iraqi atrocities in occupied Kuwait. The article noted that reports of atrocities in occupied territories have frequently proved incorrect. It concluded: ""In 1914, for example, the Germans were falsely accused by the Allies of murdering Belgian babies at the outset of World War I; in World War II many diplomats said reports of German atrocities against the Jews were exaggerated."" The passage was ambiguous; it should have made clear that it was the diplomats who were wrong in understating the magnitude of the Nazi genocide, in which six million Jews were killed.  GRAPHIC: Photo: Display of photographs hung by the Kuwaiti delegation in Security Council chamber at the United Nations, which are said to show atrocities committed by Iraqis in Kuwait. A picture of Hitler with children, second from top left, and a similar one of Saddam Hussein were later removed. (Jim Wilson/The New York Times) (pg. 20)"
