"A Ukrainian immigrant accused of killing thousands of Jews in the gas chambers of a German death camp in World War II was deported yesterday to Israel for trial. He was flown out of Kennedy International Airport aboard a regular El Al flight. The accused man, John Demjanjuk, a 65-year-old retired automobile worker from Cleveland, faces a possible death sentence if convicted of the charges arising from his purported role at the Treblinka death camp in Poland. He would be the second person to be tried in Israel on the charge of crimes against humanity, the only offense for which a civilian can be executed under Israeli law. Adolf Eichmann was hanged in 1962 after conviction on that charge. Mr. Demjanjuk's 20-year-old son, John, and his wife, Vera, stood outside the El Al departure terminal at 6 P.M. as the plane was scheduled to take off. ''Human rights were not anywhere seen in this case,'' the son said. ''The fight will go on. We are broke, but we will not give up.'' Legal Fight Began Decade Ago The legal fight began a decade ago. On Monday, the Supreme Court cleared the way for extradition when justices rejected Mr. Demjanjuk's final appeals. His lawyer, Mark O'Connor, said he had requested financial assistance from the Israeli Government so that he could fly to Jerusalem and represent his client, but had received no reply. Mr. Demjanjuk came to the United States in 1952. He changed his first name from Ivan to John when he became a citizen in 1958. He was stripped of his citizenship in 1981 on the ground that he had concealed his activities with the German forces in World War II. The Justice Department had begun its investigation in 1975 and filed denaturalization proceedings in 1977. Survivors of the Treblinka camp, which was 50 miles northeast of Warsaw, have identified Mr. Demjanjuk as a camp guard and said he was known there as ''Ivan the Terrible.'' Historians estimate that 750,000 to 900,000 people died at Treblinka. A Federal District Judge in Cleveland found ''probable cause'' to believe that Mr. Demjanjuk ''committed murders of uncounted numbers'' at the camp, where Jews from the Warsaw ghetto were put to death. Denies Having Been at Camp Lawyers for Mr. Demjanjuk contended that he was never at Treblinka and that, in any event, American courts had no authority to consider Israel's request for extradition. Mr. Demjanjuk says that he was a Red Army soldier who was captured by the German forces and that papers linking him to the Treblinka camp had been forged by the Soviet Union. American courts have upheld their authenticity. Spokesmen for a number of Jewish organizations hailed the extradition. David M. Gordis, executive vice president of the American Jewish Committee, said: ''The extradition of John Demjanjuk from the United States to Israel to stand trial for Nazi-era war crimes should be welcomed by all advocates of justice in American society. This case highlights the mutual interests of the United States and Israel in promoting justice.''"
