"The most radical of the militant groups fighting to turn Algeria into an Islamic state said today that it was ready to end its insurgency if the Algerian Government accepts a peace plan proposed by other major opposition parties on Friday. But the organization, the Armed Islamic Group -- which claimed responsibility for the hijacking of a French airliner last month -- added some conditions. It demanded punishment for generals leading the battle against Islamic militants, a ban on communist and atheist political parties and the release of two of the Islamic Group's top leaders. There was no immediate response from Algiers to the group's statement, which was released in Paris. On Friday the Algerian Government dismissed the proposals made by the other opposition parties. Today, the Interior Minister said the parties were endorsing terrorism. The Armed Islamic Group's statement is the first signal of a willingness to contemplate a negotiated end to a civil war that has taken some 30,000 lives since it began three years ago. Last year, the group denounced the broad-based Islamic Salvation Front for considering talks with the army-backed Government. Experts in North African affairs said the group had still shown no sign of backing off from its goal of creating an Iranian-style Islamic republic in Algeria, but they said that its conciliatory response to the main opposition's peace plan suggested that it wished to avoid total isolation. The civil war began after the Algerian Government canceled a second round of parliamentary elections in January 1992 that looked likely to bring the Islamic Salvation Front to power. The Government plans to hold presidential elections in late 1995, although most opposition groups are refusing to participate. Since last year, when the Government failed to make progress in sporadic talks with opposition groups, hard-line military factions appear to have gained the upper hand. In recent months, they have stepped up their offensive against militant groups, but for the moment neither side seems capable of achieving outright military victory. Today, Interior Minister Abderrahmane Meziane-Cherif presided over a conference in Algiers for 500 local officials to prepare for the elections. The Algerian daily L'Authentique described the conference as the Government's ""cutting response"" to the opposition peace plan. The opposition plan grew out of a week of talks in Rome, held under the auspices of the Sant'Edigio Roman Catholic religious community, by seven opposition parties. It proposes formation of a transitional administration that would restore political and press freedom, release political prisoners and investigate human rights abuses in preparation for democratic elections. The plan has the backing of three political parties that together won 85 percent of votes in the first round of parliamentary elections in December 1991, before the war began. It has also managed to unite such bitter rivals as the Islamic Salvation Front and the leftist Front for National Liberation, which ruled Algeria for almost three decades after independence in 1962. The Armed Islamic Group, which is thought to number only around 2,500 militants, has focused its warfare on foreigners in the hope of driving foreign embassies and companies out of Algeria. So far, it has claimed responsibility for the deaths of about 80 foreigners, including a dozen Catholic missionaries. It said it ordered the hijacking of an Air France airliner in Algiers on Christmas Eve in reprisal for French military and economic support for the Algerian Government. The hijacking ended 54 hours later in Marseilles, when French paramilitary commandos stormed the plane, killing four gunmen and freeing 171 hostages. The hijackers killed three hostages. In its statement today, the group said it was ""ready to stop the war"" and, as one condition, it demanded the immediate release of its former chief, Abdelhak Layada, and another militant, Ahmen Al-Oud. But, suggesting that its Islamic fervor has not abated, it also insisted that Communist and atheist parties be banned as ""enemies of religion"" and that the ""the law of God"" be applied to generals who have ""delayed the application of the Islamic plan"" for Algeria.  Algerian Politician Shot Dead TUNIS, Jan. 15 (Reuters) -- Muslim guerrillas today shot dead a member of Algeria's National Transitional Council, an interim parliament appointed by the Government.  The official Algerian news agency, A.P.S., said that Salah Nour, 65, a former Justice Ministry prosecutor, was gunned down outside his home at Ben Omar, in southeast Algiers.  He was appointed to the council last year with nine others to represent Algeria's war veterans organization."
