"To the Editor: ""Bush Gives Praise to Kuwait After Meeting With the Emir"" (news item, Oct. 2) quotes President Bush as applauding ""Kuwait's great progress in reconstruction, physical and political"" in the aftermath of the war against Iraq. This praise, unaccompanied by any acknowledgment of human-rights abuses in Kuwait, must ring hollow to the 250,000 Bedoons, or stateless Arabs, who face the threat of deportation when their residency permits expire Nov. 15. Although most Bedoon families have lived in Kuwait for generations, the Kuwaiti Government has never recognized them as citizens. They now fear expulsion from the only home they have ever known, without any prospect of acceptance elsewhere. A similar fate awaits the 23,000 Palestinians from Gaza, who also have no place to turn, because Israel will not allow them back, if deported Nov. 15. President Bush's remarks must also have been received bitterly by the 3,000 prisoners still in Kuwaiti detention, most without having been charged; by the 2,800 others detained since liberation, many of whom were released only after having suffered torture and serious abuse, abetted by the Kuwaiti Government's use of incommunicado detention and its failure to prosecute any of the jailers involved; by the families of the 54 people killed since liberation whose bodies were dumped in mass graves in Kuwait's al-Riqqa cemetery, without any subsequent effort by the Kuwaiti Government to identify those responsible for their execution. The President's remarks were made in the presence of the Kuwaiti Emir. The Emir's call to ""cleanse"" Kuwait of a supposed ""fifth column"" was understood to give license to Kuwaitis returning from exile, who, unable to lash out at Saddam Hussein, have taken revenge on those non-Kuwaitis who had little choice but to stay behind and endure the occupation and are now accused, often unfairly, of having sympathized with the Iraqi President. President Bush's comment is the latest in a series of Administration statements seeking to whitewash or deflect attention from Kuwait's disturbing postliberation record on human rights. The Administration, despite its tredmendous influence in Kuwait as the leader of the allied coalition, seems more concerned with reaping the political dividends of the Desert Storm military victory than with speaking out forcefully for an end to abuses by the Government it returned to power. KENNETH ROTH Deputy Director Human Rights Watch New York, Oct. 3, 1991"
