"Iraq told the chief United Nations arms inspector today that President Saddam Hussein would never open his palaces to inspection. The decision was conveyed to Richard Butler, the head of the United Nations disarmament team, by Iraqi officials in Baghdad. And on a day of bad news for the United Nations, the Iraqi decision coincided with an announcement that another United Nations mission -- a human rights team in Congo -- was also in trouble. The standoffs reflected an unaddressed crisis for the United Nations: How to deal with rising defiance by scofflaw states that ignore Security Council demands. In Congo, a long-delayed investigation into reports of massacres by troops loyal to President Laurent Kabila had to be called off and the investigators evacuated after mobs demonstrated outside their camp near Mbandaka, about 375 miles north of the capital. The Mbandaka site was the first of several areas to be studied for evidence of the killing of thousands of Hutu refugees. The Congo government had stalled the investigations for months, and agreed to allow the work to start only after Bill Richardson, the United States envoy at the United Nations, went to Kinshasa in October and, he said, extracted a pledge of no obstruction from President Kabila. Last week, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright visited Kinshasa and spoke supportively of Mr. Kabila. Within days the investigators, who began work only on Thursday, were being harassed, they said. The challenges to the United Nations are piling up. Cambodia, where the United Nations spent several billion dollars in 1992 and 1993 to prepare for the first democratic elections, is headed for another vote after a coup this year sent half the Government into exile. Rwanda, whose leaders lose no opportunity to heap contempt on the United Nations for failing to prevent the massacres in their country in 1994, has slid into another era of ethnic violence. In Angola a rebel leader, Jonas Savimbi, is refusing to stick to agreements he signed and promises he made. Mr. Butler was offered one modification: The Iraqis proposed three categories of sites, instead of the two existing classifications: permitted and prohibited. That would mean ""normal"" sites open to inspectors without special arrangements, ""sensitive"" areas open after consultation, and presidential compounds, which Iraq declared entirely off limits. It was not clear which sites the Iraqis defined as ""sensitive."" In addition to presidential palaces, previous restricted areas have included those controled by Mr. Hussein's security and intelligence forces and by his Presidential Guard. ""I am confident that in the future we will be able to conduct our inspections in normal sites without restrictions,"" Mr. Butler said at a news conference in Baghdad today. ""But I have to tell you that the Iraqi side insisted that we would never be able to inspect presidential sites."" The Security Council has said that Iraq cannot hope to be free of a crippling international embargo, imposed after its invasion of Kuwait in 1990, until it has satisfactorily accounted for all nuclear, chemical and biological weapons and materiel, as well as its long-range missiles and warheads. But Mr. Hussein appears to believe that he can hold out against demands that he reveal what is going on in his huge presidential compounds, some covering many acres. Without access to all suspect sites, Mr. Butler cannot vouch for Iraqi compliance."
