"To the Editor: ""Tunisia Puts Nearly 300 Muslim Militants on Trial"" (news article, Aug. 3) distorts the trial of 289 supporters of the banned An-Nahda (Renaissance Party) and overlooks international human rights violations that invalidate the proceedings. Scores of soldiers, security officials and fundamentalists are not being killed every month in Tunisia, as you would have us believe. The level of violence in the conflict between militant Islamic groups and the Government has, mercifully, not reached the levels to be found in Algeria and Egypt. In lumping together these three diverse situations, you provide grist for the Tunisian Government's propaganda mill, which likes nothing better than to focus on the ""Islamic threat"" while disregarding its own widespread human rights abuse. Trial observers representing major international human rights organizations, including the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights and Middle East Watch, attended sessions in Tunis and found grave irregularities in the proceedings. For example, the prosecution's evidence against the defendants relies heavily on confessions that defendants say were extracted under torture. These claims were not investigated by the authorities when they were made, more than a year ago in most cases, making verification very difficult, but leaving open the possibility that torture was indeed used to extract confessions. At least nine detainees among suspected An-Nahda supporters have died in custody since May 1991, in circumstances that strongly suggest that they were tortured to death, lending credence to torture allegations. Other abuses in the proceedings included denial or restriction of access of detainees to legal representatives before the trial and a failure to grant defense lawyers sufficient access to the trial dossiers to provide effective legal assistance. Evidence for a plot to overthrow the Tunisian Government by force of arms is extremely slim. The authorities have placed a table laden with arms allegedly seized from the conspirators at the front of the courtroom. However, the prosecution has presented no evidence linking the defendants to the weapons. The Tunisian Government has shown itself intolerant of its critics, and not only those from the Islamic opposition. Last June, the Tunisian League for Human Rights was forced to dissolve itself, rather than comply with a new law designed to limit its independence. Nor has the Government been above arbitrary detention and torture of perceived opponents. North African governments should do all in their power to respond to violent and antidemocratic forces in their societies by strengthening the institutions that defend liberty and the rule of law. Repression and violence will only result in more violence and instability. NEIL HICKS Coordinator, Middle East and North Africa Program, Lawyers Committee for Human Rights New York, Aug. 4, 1992"
