"A journalist who died last year has left $30,000 to the Palestine Liberation Organization, and two major Jewish organizations are trying to block the bequest in Surrogate's Court in Manhattan. In an unusual legal proceeding, lawyers representing the American Jewish Congress and the Anti-Defamation League of the B'nai B'rith are seeking to examine the structure, aims and activities of the P.L.O. to show that the bequest should not be honored. The lawyers say they plan to question Zehdi Labib Terzi, the P.L.O.'s permanent observer to the United Nations. A hearing scheduled for this morning was postponed until next month. Mr. Terzi said he would participate in the proceeding. The surrogate in the case, Marie M. Lambert of Manhattan, Tuesday granted both Jewish organizations the right to file ''friend of the court'' briefs and to participate in the discovery proceeding. Reporter Won Pulitzer Under long-established precedents in New York, bequests with conditions that run contrary to the public good have not been enforced by the courts. At the same time, however, outright gifts to even the most controversial organizations have almost never been invalidated. The two Jewish organizations are seeking to prove the P.L.O. is a ''terrorist organization'' that should be barred from receiving the bequest, which was made by Fred Sparks of New York. Mr. Sparks won a Pulitzer Prize in 1951 for his reporting from postwar Europe while working for The Chicago Daily News.  ''This is our first opportunity to have a P.L.O. spokesman testify in a court of law under oath about the organization's participation in terrorist activities,'' said Jeffrey Sinensky of the Anti-Defamation League. ''The American system of justice and the Surrogate's Court,'' he said, ''should not be used to funnel money to an organization engaged in violent crime.'' Mr. Terzi, reached at the United Nations yesterday, countered: ''This is a violation of Mr. Sparks' rights to dispose of his funds according to his wishes. If this man were alive who could prevent him from giving whatever he wants to whomever he wants?'' 'Repression' Is Claimed Mr. Terzi argued unsuccessfully in court last week that the Jewish groups should be kept out of the case. He charged that since 1948 the organizations had supported ''morally and financially the State of Israel in perpetrating acts and conducting policies of repression and state terrorism'' against the Palestinians. Mr. Terzi also charged that the organizations had become interested in the case partly out of ''vindictiveness'' because Mr. Sparks was a Jew who did not believe in Zionism. Mr. Sparks died at the age of 65 on Feb. 18, 1981. He left 10 percent of his $300,000 estate to the P.L.O. Among the other beneficiaries listed were the Overseas Press Club, the Maryknoll Fathers, the New York Public Library and the late Robin Maugham, a nephew of the author W. Somerset Maugham. On April 15, 1981, Surrogate Lambert, citing uncertainty over whether the bequest would violate New York law or public policy, withheld the grant. A trial was scheduled for April 20. One issue in the proceeding is the impartiality of Surrogate Lambert, who was first elected in 1977.  The Code of Judicial Conduct bars candidates from making ''pledges or promises of conduct in office'' or announcing views ''on disputed legal or political issues.'' Mrs. Lambert vowed during her election campaign that she would place no funds controlled by Surrogate's Court, which oversees the disposition of estates, into banks supporting the Arab boycott of Israel. ''I don't think it violates the Canon of Ethics for me to let the public know how I stand on the State of Israel and those banks' participation in the embargo that indirectly causes the death of Israelis,'' she said at the time. Robert M. Thabit, who represents the P.L.O. in the case, said he might move for a change of venue or to have Surrogate Lambert disqualified. In the meantime, the list of participants in the case has grown. It now includes the New York Civil Liberties Union, which is expected to file a brief on the P.L.O.'s behalf, several prominent New York law firms, and the incoming president of the City Bar Association, Louis A. Craco. Mr. Craco, a partner at Willkie, Farr & Gallagher, volunteered to question Mr. Terzi on behalf of the Anti-Defamation League. Three other law firms - Shearman & Sterling; Breed, Abbott & Morgan; and Thacher, Proffitt & Wood - turned down requests by Mr. Thabit for assistance in the case. Attorneys for the Jewish groups charge that a decision to allow a bequest to the P.L.O. - engaged, they say, in a ''campaign of terror designed to eradicate the State of Israel'' - would legitimize similar gifts to the Irish Republican Army, Basque separatists and similar groups. ''Carried to its logical end, the grant in this case might ultimately damage America and its citizens, for the funding of violence has repercussions which cannot be predicted or limited,'' the American Jewish Congress said in court papers. Mr. Terzi replied: ''In the country I come from - Palestine - the wills of Jews, Christians, Moslems are sacrosanct in their entirety.  I don't understand how you can prohibit the execution of one portion of a will.'' Attorneys for the New York Civil Liberties Union say that Mrs.  Lambert's actions threaten the rights of all controversial organizations. ''We have grave misgivings about the process being established by the Manhattan surrogate of allowing an intrusive and ill-defined inquiry into a political organization under the broad rubric of 'public policy,' '' said Dorothy Samuels, executive director of the liberties group. Role of Attorney General First to question Mr. Terzi will be Irwin Strom, a deputy state attorney general. By law, his office represents the interests of the ''ultimate beneficiaries'' of all charitable bequests. In this posture, the state's interest technically runs counter to that of the P.L.O.'s, since the amounts left to the various charities would increase if the P.L.O. grant were disallowed. But a spokesman for the Attorney General's office stressed that the state was more interested in eliciting facts than in acting as ''hired gun'' for the chartities in the case. Mr. Sparks, born in New York, was the son of Bennett E.  Siegelstein, a lawyer who once served in the New York State Assembly and founded the Menorah Home and Hospital for the Aged in Brooklyn.  He changed his name when he started his career. After many years with The Chicago Daily News, he joined The New York World Telegram and Sun in 1953. According to friends, his experiences covering the plight of Palestinian refugees after the Israeli war of independence in 1948 made a deep impression on him and may account for his bequest. Miriam S. Greene of Manhattan, Mr. Sparks' sister, said: ''We all grew up in a very fine middle-class Jewish family.  The only thing I can think of is that my brother was beset with self-hatred.''"
