"To the Editor: The day after President Clinton met in Washington with his Egyptian counterpart, you wrote in ""President Mubarak's Flawed Advice"" (editorial, April 7) that Hosni Mubarak's regime is ""inbred, bureaucratic and unresponsive."" You did not mention that the Mubarak Government also has an appalling human rights record, which opponents use to discredit the legitimacy of the state. Rights abuses in Egypt are cited by Islamist militants as justification for their own violence against government and by public figures, the police, Christians and foreign visitors. Despite Egypt's projection of a democratic face to the international community, the list of violations is lengthy and well documented by nongovernmental organizations and our State Department. Systematic torture and long-term detention without charge are two of the most egregious abuses, but not the only ones. Emergency law, in force since 1981, is virtually institutionalized. Surveillance and harassment by security forces is rampant. Incommunicado detention is standard practice after security suspects are arrested. Family members increasingly are being taken ""hostage"" to force wanted relatives to give themselves up. Civilians accused of terrorist offenses are tried in military courts, bypassing Egypt's respected civilian courts and leaving them no right of appeal of sentences, which include the death penalty. Civil society is also not spared. Private citizens organizations are closely regulated and in some cases have been shut down by authorities or denied legal status. Books are banned, including ""The Children of Gebelawi,"" the 1959 novel by the Nobel Prize winner Naguib Mahfouz. Newspapers are prohibited from publishing caricatures of President Mubarak. Radio and television, which are state owned and controlled, are anything but open forums for the expression of diverse opinions. Christian churches cannot be built or even repaired without the President's permission, and Egyptian converts from Islam to Christianity have been hounded, harassed and in some cases also tortured by security forces. This poor human rights record has yielded resentment, the narrowing of civil society, religious intolerance and erosion of the rule of law in Egypt -- and fertile ground for the growth of extremist alternatives. It is time to examine and publicize these problems, and put pressure on President Mubarak's Government to remedy some of the ills it has created and perpetuated. VIRGINIA N. SHERRY Assoc. Director, Middle East Watch New York, April 7, 1993"
