"In another sign that Iran's leadership may be reaching for a closer relationship with the West, the Teheran Government agreed today to let a United Nations official make a second visit to the country to investigate accusations of unlawful executions, torture and other serious human rights violations. The agreement was negotiated between the Iranian mission here and a group of Western countries, unanimously adopted at a meeting of the 43-member United Nations Human Rights Commission and publicly accepted at that meeting by Iran. Under the accord, Reynaldo Galindo Pohl is to make a second visit to Iran later this year. Mr. Galindo Pohl, a Salvadoran lawyer, had been asked by the commission to investigate Iranian rights abuses in 1984, but was not allowed in until January 1988. The accord says Mr. Galindo Pohl has no proof of Iranian opposition claims that political prisoners are being executed under false charges of drug trafficking. But it expresses ''concern'' at the evidence he has accumulated of unlawful executions, torture and many other human rights abuses, calls on Iran to respect international human rights treaties and agrees to examine its record again next year. As the Human Rights Commission nears the end of its annual six-week session on Friday, Iraq today escaped public criticism of its human rights record, as well as an attempt to investigate its performance. Accusations Against Iraq After accusations it used poison gas against Kurdish rebels, Iraq invited the Human Rights Commission on a private visit to the country this spring at the Government's expense. Today, a group of Western countries tried to accept the invitation, but on the condition that the visit be an official one, organized and paid for by the United Nations. Iraq refused and the Western initiative was defeated on a vote of 18 to 14, with 9 abstentions. Hungary and Bulgaria voted with the West against Iraq, but the Soviet Union and its Byelorussian republic, which has a United Nations seat, abstained. The commission also adopted a more critical approach today toward Guatemala and Haiti. In 1987, the commission suspended its public investigation into human rights abuses in these two countries after they agreed to accept United Nations help in strengthening respect for law and democracy. Today, it voted to continue that help, but also appointed an official to oversee the assistance program and ordered him to report on progress next year."
