"President Bush has ample reason to praise his Turkish hosts as he arrives in Ankara today. When Saddam Hussein grabbed Kuwait last August, Turkey cut Iraq's oil pipeline and gave allied forces full use of Turkish bases. In the war's wake, Turkey collaborated in creating a safe haven for Iraqi Kurds, now within the protective reach of an allied mobile force in Turkey, whose value may be tested if reported skirmishes in northern Iraq develop into something more serious. For this, applause is in order for Turkey and its risk-taking President, Turgut Ozal. Yet American recognition of Turkey's importance as an ally does not lessen the need for candor about a shameful human rights record. It does no favor to Turkish democracy to ignore torture and denial of rights to Turkey's own Kurdish minority. There have been important gains over the past decade as rule by generals has yielded to elective civilian government. An outspoken Turkish press and courageous human rights groups have publicized police abuses. Officials have ceased pretending that Kurds are simply ""mountain Turks,"" and it is no longer a criminal offense for Kurds to speak their own language on the street. Some harsh penal laws have been repealed. But a sweeping antiterrorist measure has been enacted, human rights monitors are harassed, and newspapers and books in the Kurdish language are forbidden. Political prisoners die in custody or are executed after summary proceedings. Widespread use of torture is amply documented by Amnesty International, Helsinki Watch and other monitoring groups. The Human Rights Foundation of Turkey lists 200 torture incidents since January, an increase it ascribes to protection given police under the new antiterror law. Granted, Turkey is beset by political violence mounted by Kurdish separatists and other extremists. But that scarcely justifies brutal measures that magnify grievances. Nor can excesses be excused as growing pains of a democratic system begun 69 years ago. Turkish democracy will never come of age if dissident voices are stifled in torture cells. Saying as much, at least in private, is Mr. Bush's minimum obligation."
