"The human rights climate in Turkey seems to be getting better, slowly. America and the rest of Europe should of course welcome this progress, tentative as it is, but we should also keep up the scrutiny and pressure that spurred it in the first place. On Dec. 10, five nations - France, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands and Sweden - announced that they had reached a friendly settlement with Turkey and were dropping the complaints they had lodged against it in 1982 in the European Commission of Human Rights. Turkey hailed the announcement as a reaffirmation of its place in the European community. The United States welcomed it as an acknowledgment of Turkey's efforts to restore democracy. It was also welcomed, though somewhat more cautiously, by Turkish victims of human rights abuse. They hope that the agreement - and the expectations that come with it - will bring them further relief. We were in Turkey when the settlement was announced. During this visit, in dramatic contrast to a previous mission in 1983, we were given unlimited opportunities to meet with whomever we wished, including Prime Minister Turgut Ozal, members of the Government and the new Parliament, party leaders and private citizens from all walks of life. We explored a confusing landscape - a combination of encouraging changes and severe human rights violations. A new openness in Turkish society - it all began with the legislative elections in November 1983 - is most apparent in its exuberant, outspoken press. Private citizens who are critical of the system also seem less fearful than they were two years ago, more inclined to speak out, both publicly and privately. Parliamentarians and other political leaders are engaged in lively, often acrimonious debate on subjects that would have been unmentionable a short time ago, including prison conditions, torture and human rights violations. Yet abuses continue. There is torture in police detention centers where suspects are denied the right to see their families or lawyers. Interrogation techniques routinely include electric shocks, suspension by the arms and merciless beating of the soles of the feet. Prison conditions are abominable, and the many thousands of young people who were swept up on terrorism charges in 1980, following the military takeover, are still awaiting the outcome of prolonged group trials. Members of the Turkish Peace Association - prominent people such as the former head of the Turkish Medical Association, a well-known theater director and the wife of the former mayor of Istanbul - have spent three years in military prisons, for views expressed before 1980. At the same time, human rights have become a major domestic issue: A recent poll indicated that if elections were held now, the majority of votes would go to a left opposition party that has made human rights its focus. Some Turks claim that the opposition is ''using'' human rights as a convenient issue with which to attack the Government. Others question the sincerity of the Government's response - its claims to be correcting these abuses. But no one denies that Turkish politicians have become extremely sensitive to international pressure for human rights. Contradictions abound. Martial law has been lifted in all but nine of 67 provinces. It has, however, been replaced in most places by an emergency-measures law that is almost as severe. There is a new ''police law'' that reduces the permissible period of police detention, but it is still possible, and usual, to hold a suspect incommunicado for as long as 15 days. The Government, which has taken some steps to punish torturers, claims difficulty in bringing the police under control. Yet it was easy for us to find major torture centers in both Istanbul and Ankara. Nevertheless, we are hopeful. We met many courageous people fighting for freedom despite a restrictive constitution and other repressive legislation. Human rights issues are being discussed everywhere, and there is strong momentum for change. What's needed now is continued attention from abroad to encourage the moral leadership and political will of Turkey's highest authorities."
