"To the Editor: The practical inability of Lebanese officials to discover what happened in the Sabra and Shatila camps (news story Jan. 30) is distressing. Of course, it is easier for President Gemayel's people to ignore the truth, and then to blame the Israelis or Americans for atrocities actually committed by Lebanese whose cooperation is needed if a stable government is to exist in that sorry country. But the political cost of such a position is intolerable: How can factions friendly to the P.L.O. or apprehensive about their own safety join in a unified government unable to control the militias who feel free to kill ethnic rivals? Is genocide to be the basis for Lebanese unity? Failure to apply the laws of war in an international armed conflict, and failure to apply the equivalent humanitarian laws in a conflict not of an international character are equally violations of the word of Lebanon given in the 1949 Geneva Conventions, to which the United States and all states concerned in the Middle East are parties. Now, if the Government of Lebanon is violating its inherited commitments with regard to war crimes or crimes against humanity and those violations, whatever their political reasons, make future peace in Lebanon unlikely, the United States has no business in the area and should consider withdrawing. The fact that Israel and other states find it convenient for the United States, by its military presence, to share the blame for the failures of their policies is no reason for the U.S. to accept that role. Indeed, the threat simply to withdraw, made credible by legal arguments which nobody can deny, seems much more likely to bring about a shift to realistic policies by the militarily obsessed Israelis and ethnically obsessed Lebanese than continued American presence with no practical leverage and no ultimate responsibility for the success or failure of our proposals. The worst alternative is what we are doing: Displaying a physical presence that lets each side blame us for not pressuring the other into an unacceptable settlement, while all sides, for internal political reasons, refuse to bargain seriously. ALFRED P. RUBIN, Professor of International Law, Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University, Medford, Mass., Jan. 31, 1983"
