"Amnesty International issued a report today asserting that Iraqi occupation forces in Kuwait had tortured and killed hundreds of people, including 300 premature babies who died because incubators were stolen. The human rights organization's first comprehensive description of abuses in occupied Kuwait since the Iraqi invasion on Aug. 2 gives few precise figures. But by characterizing the deaths as being in the hundreds, Amnesty is reporting a far lower toll than the thousands of dead reported by exiled Kuwaiti officials. The report cites ""widespread abuses of human rights"" in Kuwait, including ""the arbitrary arrest and detention without trial of thousands of civilians and military personnel; the widespread torture of such persons in custody; the imposition of the death penalty, and the extrajudicial execution of hundreds of unarmed civilians, including children."" ""In addition, hundreds of people in Kuwait remain unaccounted for, having effectively 'disappeared' in detention, and many of them are feared dead,"" it says. [Iraq rejected the Amnesty report as a collection of baseless charges, Reuters reported. The official Iraqi News Agency quoted a statement issued by the Iraqi Embassy in London as saying, ""The allegations reported by Amnesty International have no basis of truth whatsover.""] The Iraqis left more than 300 premature babies to die after stealing their incubators from Kuwait City hospitals, the report says. Amnesty said that its investigators had interviewed several doctors and nurses and that all had seen bodies of the babies. One doctor helped bury 72 bodies, it says. The report says some people were slain because they carried Kuwaiti money or refused to pledge allegiance to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq. Others were killed for refusing to help Iraqi soldiers steal medical equipment or while trying to flee the country. Amnesty sas its investigators spoke to victims of torture, doctors who treated them, their relatives and witnesses. The report lists 38 methods of torture used by Iraqi forces, including beatings while the victim was suspended from a rotating ceiling fan, rape of women and young men, stubbing out of lighted cigarettes on victims' eyeballs and tethering of victims in the burning sun for hours without water."
