"Following are excerpts from President Bush's remarks on Iraq during a news conference today at the White House: In recent weeks and months, we have heard and seen new evidence of harsh repression by the Government of Saddam Hussein against the men, women and children of Iraq. What emerges from eyewitness accounts, as well as from the detailed Aug. 11 testimony before the United Nations Security Council of U.N. human rights envoy Max van der Stoel, is further graphic proof of Saddam's brutality. We now know of Saddam's use of helicopters and, beginning this spring, fixed-wing aircraft to bomb and strafe civilians and villages there in the south, his execution last month of merchants in Baghdad, and his gradual tightening of the economic blockade against the people of the north. These reports are further confirmation that the Government of Iraq is failing to meet its obligations under United Nations Security Council Resolution 688. This resolution, passed in April of 1991, demands that Saddam Hussein end repression of the Iraqi people. By denying access to U.N. human-rights monitors and other observers, Saddam has sought to prevent the world from learning of his brutality. It is time to insure the world does know. And therefore the United States and its coalition partners have today informed the Iraqi Government that 24 hours from now coalition aircraft, including those of the United States, will begin flying surveillance missions in southern Iraq south of the 32 degrees north latitude to monitor the situation there. This will provide coverage of the areas where a majority of the most significant recent violations of Resolution 688 have taken place. The coalition is also informing Iraq's Government that in order to facilitate these monitoring efforts, it is establishing a no-fly zone for all Iraqi fixed- and rotary-wing aircraft. This new prohibition will also go into effect in 24 hours over this same area. It'll remain in effect until a coalition determines that it is no longer required. It'll be similar to the no-fly zone the coalition imposed on northern Iraq more than a year ago. I want to emphasize that these actions are designed to enhance our ability to monitor developments in southern Iraq. These actions are consistent with longstanding U.S. policy toward Iraq. We seek Iraq's compliance, not its partition. The United States continues to support Iraq's territorial unity and bears no ill will towards its people. . . . Q. Mr. President, are you planning similar action to save the people of Bosnia who are also being slaughtered? A. We are in close consultation on Bosnia. As you know, the conference is going on right now. Acting Secretary Eagleburger is there, and we are discussing a wide array of things regarding Bosnia. I have expressed my concerns about use of U.S. force, certainly ground forces, in that area, but there's a lot of consultation going on right now, and I hope that that conference can come forth with productive answers that will encourage the people in that area to find peaceful means of solving these questions. . . .  Partition of Iraq Q. How dire would the consequences be if Iraq is partitioned into three parts? Does the United States support that partition? A. No, and as I said in my statement, we do not. Bush's Motivations Q. Sir, it seems that one reason we didn't defend the Shiites after the war was we were concerned about this partition. Now have you had a different read on the Shiites? We hear stories about the Shiites not being considered a threat, that in fact they're more Iraqi than they are pro-Iranian and Shiite. Is that true? Is that your latest intelligence read on them? And are you concerned that you're now doing this so late in the political year that this simply is going to look funny to the American people? A. Well, do you think it looks funny to the British people, the French people, the Saudi people? The answer is no. I'm not concerned about that in the least. I don't think the other side'll try to put a political spin on this. We're talking about something that's very serious here. And General Scowcroft notified Governor Clinton of what it is we're doing. But I'm not worried about the politics of it at all."
