"In the center of Jerusalem a great development underway, the Mamilla project, will link the old city to the new. The construction workers are Romanians who live in trailers next to the site. Supervisors communicate with them through a Jerusalem Palestinian who was educated in Romania. What a bitter irony for Palestinians. They used to do most of the construction work in Israel, but fear of terrorism has led the Israeli Government virtually to close its borders with the West Bank and Gaza. Two years ago 120,000 Palestinians came in from the occupied territories daily to work. Today quotas allow fewer than 25,000. Instead, Israel has recruited construction workers and farm laborers from Romania, Bulgaria, even Thailand. There are 70,000 guest workers in the country now, and more coming. The border closures are an economic disaster for many Palestinian families. According to Israeli Government sources, per capita income in Gaza has declined by 30 to 50 percent since Yasir Arafat and his Palestinian Authority took over there last year, largely because of the closures. ""People feel freer in Gaza with the occupation ended,"" one man said. ""They can go to the beach. But they are poorer than ever."" Israeli political leaders talk about the need to help Palestinian economic development. But the Israeli bureaucracy, seemingly unmoved, continues to make life difficult. Trucks carrying farm produce out of Palestinian areas, or construction materials in, are held up for days. Or a grotesque recent example: The Palestinian Authority is authorized to collect a tax on telephone bills in the West Bank, about $1 million a month. But the Israeli telephone company moved its West Bank billing office from Ramallah to Jerusalem and said the Authority was no longer entitled to the money. Of course Israel has its criticisms of Mr. Arafat. His failure to crack down on terrorists, officials say, is what has forced the border closures. And the closures have reduced terrorist incidents inside Israel proper. But that does not assuage the resentment of ordinary Palestinians at their collective punishment. Palestinians, too, have complaints about Chairman Arafat: that he centralizes power in his own hands, keeps jobs for the boys, resists accountability. The American group Human Rights Watch has criticized the Palestinian Authority for rights violations. To deal with that issue the Authority appointed an Independent Commission on Citizens' Rights headed by Hanan Ashrawi, who made a mark internationally as the articulate Palestinian spokeswoman in earlier stages of peace talks. Mrs. Ashrawi said in an interview that the Human Rights Watch report was well done. Her commission has filed reports criticizing such things as intimidation of the press, assaults on prisoners and detention of a human rights lawyer, Raji Sourani, who condemned the creation of a state security court. (He was released after a critical statement by the commission.) Economic distress among Palestinians is the greater because international donors have not kept their promises to help the new Authority. They came up with only $228 million of $800 million pledged for economic development last year, and have given less than half of $60 million promised to cover the Authority's operating expenses through this month. Nor has the Oslo peace plan stopped Israel's creeping annexation of the West Bank. Jewish settlements have continued to expand since then, and nearly 40,000 more acres of Palestinian land have been confiscated. Polls show that Palestinians are deeply disappointed at the results, so far, of the Oslo process. But I believe that that opinion will turn around if and when an election for a Palestinian council is held after redeployment of Israeli occupation forces in the West Bank, as Oslo envisages. An election would give a crucial new dimension to people's lives: a chance to participate, for the first time, in their own governance. Many in the West Bank and Gaza would still agree with what a Palestinian intellectual said to me: ""Whether or not this process works -- whether or not we reach peace with Israel -- we had to go through that gate. We had to test the possibilities between us."" But the mood will surely darken unless, before long, Israel and the P.L.O. agree to hold the election."
