"Kuwait's martial law tribunals, interrupted for two weeks after a storm of criticism by lawyers and human rights monitors, will resume in earnest on Saturday with the trial of two dozen people accused of helping publish a pro-Iraqi newspaper during the occupation. But stung by the outrage against its first verdicts, which included a much-publicized 15-year sentence for a man who wore a T-shirt with Saddam Hussein's picture on it, the Government is approaching the new trials with great care. Representatives of Human Rights Watch, a monitoring group based in New York, while still concerned about how the trials of accused collaborators will proceed, said they saw signs of improvement in the pretrial sessions that took place this week. There is a marked difference in the tribunals since the first one on May 20, when harsh sentences were handed down with little or no discussion in open court, said Ann Lesch, a board member of Human Rights Watch, who has been observing the proceedings. Kuwaiti officials, for their part, point out that their laws do not call for customs like trial by jury or a presumption of innocence until guilt is proven. But Kuwaiti law, and even martial law, guarantees that a defendant may cross-examine witnesses and consult with legal counsel, the human rights group says. International law guarantees the same rights, and the Kuwaiti trials are viewed by many in the West as a test of whether the emirate will adopt democratic principles now that the West has freed it from the Iraqi invaders. Beyond the problems with the conduct of the trials themselves are persistent complaints from defendants of beatings and other forms of coercion while they were under arrest. It is not clear whether the defendants' lawyers can have confessions thrown out on the grounds that they may have been coerced. Human Rights Watch and other organizations say they have obtained evidence of beatings by the Kuwaiti police and military since the war ended. Early this week, Kuwait extended martial law for another month. But in doing so, Prime Minister Saad al-Abdullah al-Sabah, the Kuwaiti Crown Prince, said the Government would prosecute Kuwaitis responsible for human rights violations, including policemen or members of the ruling family. Many of them have been accused of rounding up, beating and torturing Palestinians, Iraqis and other non-citizens left in Kuwait just after the war. ""Some of you might say that the sons of some officials or even members of the family are carrying out illegal acts,"" the Prime Minister said. ""This is not an excuse. I mean every word I say."" Most of the defendants now facing trial are Palestinians, Iraqis, Jordanians or Bedoons, the stateless people who live on the margins of Kuwaiti society. These are the same people who suffered the heaviest reprisals by Kuwaitis just after the war, and one of the ironies of the trials is that people who are excluded from Kuwaiti citizenship are being accused of treason. Hundreds of defendants are to be tried in the coming weeks. One of the most significant cases involves eight military officers who participated in the Government set up by Iraq immediately after the invasion on Aug. 2. Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about Kuwaitis accused of collaborating with Iraq referred incorrectly to the status of the trials. They were not interrupted for two weeks. Further developments are reported today on this page.  GRAPHIC: Photo: As the Kuwaiti government approaches new trials for accused collaborators with care after a storm of criticism, Palestinians claim it has failed to stop abuses ranging from torture to petty harassment. A man threw refuse on a growing mound of garbage in Hawalli, the main Palestinian district in Kuwait City where rubbish has not been collected since the liberation of the city three months ago. (Associated Press)"
