"Newly declassified State Department documents provide further evidence that even as the Reagan and Bush Administrations forged ahead with a policy of conciliation toward Saddam Hussein, they were amassing evidence of Iraq's military capabilities and regional ambitions, its harboring of Palestinian terrorists and its eradication of political opponents. While senior officials publicly portrayed the Iraqi President as having curbed his radical impulses, some privately characterized him as a totalitarian leader whose world view, in the words of one State Department memo in September 1988, ""is that of a conspirator who believes that power comes from the barrel of a gun."" The documents, declassified this week in response to appeals by Representative Sam Gejdenson, a Connecticut Democrat, provide the fullest record to date of the relationship between the countries from 1984, when the Reagan Administration quietly discarded its official neutrality in the Iran-Iraq war, until August 1990, when the Bush Administration scrambled to punish Iraq for its invasion of Kuwait. Wealth of New Details While the policy of conciliation has been known, the declassified material provides a wealth of new details. Mr. Gejdenson heads a House foreign affairs subcommittee that is investigating the Administration's policy toward Iraq before the gulf war. A growing number of lawmakers have argued that there might never have been a war had the United States pursued a harder line against Mr. Hussein. The State Department memos, cablegrams and letters and interviews with senior Administration officials reveal fierce internal battles over issues like the transfer of high-technology equipment to Iraq, human rights violations, terrorism and American-backed agricultural loans to Iraq. Despite ominous signs of aggressive behavior by Mr. Hussein in early 1990, the Bush Administration did not penalize him with measures like trade sanctions, a reduction of the American diplomatic presence in Baghdad, a cutoff of technology transfers or reinstatement of Iraq on the list of nations supporting terrorism. Instead, it sent a stream of private diplomatic messages of concern. No 'Signal' of Outrage ""These documents show that the U.S. Government took no action that would send a signal to Saddam that our outrage was so great when he gassed the Kurds, when he harbored terrorists, that it would cost him the friendship of the United States,"" Mr. Gejdenson said in a telephone interview. ""It's worse than no one paying attention. Those paying attention at the highest levels were trying to coddle Saddam."" Among the revelations is that a State Department document apparently written shortly after the 1988 election of Mr. Bush warned that Iraq had emerged from its eight-year war with Iran as a ""great military and political power, and is aiming higher,"" adding that it was using a ""big-stick approach to the Kuwait border issue and in Lebanon."" But a seven-page review of United States-Iraq policy recommended that the United States open a major campaign to push through technology transfers despite the objections of the Commerce and Defense Departments, calling technology ""our most important asset"" with Iraq. The newly declassified documents also show that the State Department's Bureau of Human Rights concluded that Iraq showed a consistent pattern of gross violations of human rights after it used chemical weapons against the Kurds in 1988 and therefore was subject to various economic sanctions under law, according to a November 1988 memo to George P. Shultz, then the Secretary of State. But the Administration overruled its human rights experts, deciding instead to oppose the sanctions on the grounds that they represented ""Congressional micro-management of foreign policy."" State Department Skeptical The decision was made despite State Department skepticism that Iraq would keep its promises to refrain from future use of chemical weapons. ""Having gotten away with the use of chemical weapons on a number of occasions, the Iraqis may very well use them again the next time they consider such use necessary,"" said the joint memo from the heads of three State Department bureaus. The documents also show that the United States knew that Iraq was providing safe haven to Palestinian terrorists from 1982 to 1990, but repeatedly told Congress that the evidence did not warrant returning Iraq to the list of countries supporting terrorism. An assessment by intelligence agencies in July 1990 concluded that Mr. Hussein ""has strengthened his ties to terrorist groups and may use terrorism to intimidate his Arab and Western opponents."" But there was fierce opposition within the State Department and elsewhere in the Administration to labeling Iraq a supporter of terrorism, according to senior Administration officials, and the country was reinstated on the list only after the Kuwait invasion. Weapons Got Through The documents also show that despite an official ban on the transfer of American-made military equipment to Iraq during the Iran-Iraq war, some weapons and weapons with American components did get through via third countries. Among them were 100,000 artillery shells produced in Greece with American-made fuses that were shipped in 1986. Most of the documents discussing foreign policy recommendations and analyses date from the Reagan Administration, when Iraq was at war with Iran, a sworn enemy of the United States. Few of the documents bear the name of Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d, and Mr. Gejdenson said that the State Department has thus far refused to declassify other important documents. Some of the most interesting memos concern the State Department's intimate knowledge of terrorist activities by Palestinians based in Baghdad during the 1980's. The documents say three groups that the United States has blamed for terrorist incidents -- those led by Abu Nidal and Abul Abbas and one called the May 15 Group -- received safe haven in Baghdad or had links to groups there. The 1982 removal of Iraq from the State Department list of sponsors of terrorism paved the way for billions of dollars in American trade with Iraq. When some members of Congress urged that Iraq be returned to the terrorism list, a letter from Mr. Schultz assured them that Iraq would be restored to the list if there was evidence that it had resumed support for these groups. But a July 1986 survey of United States policy on Iraq's terrorism, provided to Mr. Shultz by the State Department's acting chief intelligence officer, said that ""there have been developments that suggest that Iraq remains reluctant to cut completely its links to terrorist groups."" It said that ""Abul Abbas seems to have been permitted to take refuge in Iraq following the Achille Lauro hijacking,"" a notorious takeover of a cruise ship in which an American was killed. A Warning in 1990 The documents show that in June 1990, the American Ambassador to Iraq, April C. Glaspie, warned the Iraqi Deputy Foreign Minister, Nizar Hamdoon, about the return to Iraq of Abu Nidal, who is held responsible for numerous terrorist attacks in the 1980's.  The documents also illustrate a concerted State Department campaign to transfer high-technology goods to Iraq, involving frequent attacks on the Pentagon and the Commerce Departments for obstructing the improvement in relations by withholding licenses for goods that could be used by Iraq's military. One April 1986 document written in the State Department's Bureau for Near eastern and South Asian Affairs, for example, said the Pentagon ""has simply found a device for blocking legitimate high-tech sales to Iraq while appearing to take the high ground on proliferation issues."" In a later, undated memo during the Bush Administration, John H. Kelly, as Assistant Secretary of State responsible for the Middle East, characterized United States licensing procedures as ""a drag on trade with Iraq,"" recommending that the State Department could play a more active role in curbing the authority of an interagency committee responsible for reviewing exports that could be used in Iraq's weapons of mass destruction. Eager to Show Good Will So eager was the State Department to garner good will with Mr. Hussein that in a memo in July 1989, Mr. Kelly and another official recommended to his superior, Under Secretary of State Reginald Bartholomew, that the United States approve the transfer of a system to protect Mr. Hussein's personal aircraft and helicopters form missile attack. The memo said the ""sale of this system to the head-of-state would be a small good-will gesture"" in line with United States policy. Although the sale never went through, according to Administration officials, the memo says Mr. Hussein was allowed to buy communications security devices for his Presidential Palace. The documents also illustrate the prevailing view that Mr. Hussein's moderate ""tilt"" during the Iran-Iraq war was a strategic change and not just a temporary tactical maneuver. ""Iraq's shift toward moderation, cooperation with neighbors, and mainline Arab positions on Palestine seems permanent and deepening,"" the State Department's top intelligence officer wrote in March 1988, five months before the end of the Iran-Iraq war. The memo continued, ""Fears of Iraqi aggression seem exaggerated,"" adding that ""Kuwait might have had cause to be anxious"" only if Iraq had decisively and quickly won the war years before."
