"In meetings with members of the United Nations Security Council, President Bush sought today to shore up support for a new resolution imposing sanctions on Libya for its refusal to extradite two suspects in the 1988 bombing of Pan Am 103 for trial in the United States, Administration officials said. In his meetings at the United Nations, Mr. Bush spent 20 minutes with Prime Minister Li Peng of China, the first meeting between the leaders in nearly three years. With the Administration facing another fight with Congress over the extension of China's trading privileges, Secretary of State James A. Baker 3d said Mr. Bush had told Mr. Li that the Chinese record on human rights was ""insufficient"" and needed ""significant improvement."" Response 'Not Acceptable' But Mr. Baker indicated that Mr. Li had merely dismissed Mr. Bush's concerns by saying that China did not accept the idea that its record on human rights can be judged by other countries' standards, a position that is increasingly likely to result in Congress's placing conditions on favorable tariff treatment for Beijing. Mr. Baker said Mr. Li's response was ""not acceptable under our standards."" Mr. Li's address to the Security Council earlier, which made the same point on human rights, offered little comfort to American officials. Earlier today, Mr. Baker said Mr. Bush and President Francois Mitterrand of France, who met this morning at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, had discussed the wording of the proposed new resolution against Libya, which American officials said was being drafted and could be presented in early February. The United States wants the resolution to go beyond merely condemning Libya for not complying with a resolution passed unanimously by the Security Council on Jan. 21 demanding that the two suspects in the 1988 bombing over Lockerbie, Scotland, be surrendered. ""Terrorists and their state sponsors must know there will be serious consequences if they violate international law,"" Mr. Bush said in an address to a summit meeting of the 15 Security Council nations, seeking to link the Western standoff with Libya to the Council's concerted action against Iraq after it invaded Kuwait. The Bush Administration wants some sort of sanctions imposed against Libya, at a minimum an embargo on airline flights to and from Libya and on sales of aircraft parts, officials said. ""There's not much support at the Security Council for more than that,"" one official said today. Policy Produces Little Although Mr. Bush pressed Mr. Li to improve China's human rights record, American officials said Mr. Bush had already concluded that the current leadership in China is unlikely to do that. They conceded that his policy of ""engagement"" with Beijing since the nationwide crackdown on dissent in China in 1989 has produced little in the way of results. Still, the officials said, Mr. Bush is likely to veto any measure by Congress that would attach conditions to the extension of China's most-favored-nation tariff treatment. Such legislation could be passed as early as next week. In this political climate, officials said, Mr. Bush hoped primarily to get through the meeting, which the Chinese requested, with as little embarrassment as possible. ""It was our judgment that we had to do this meeting and we're trying to do it with as little attention as possible,"" a senior official said. Preparing for Yeltsin Meeting While Mr. Bush met with his fellow leaders in New York, the Administration was preparing for the meeting at Camp David on Saturday with President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia. Officials traveling with Mr. Bush said the two were expected to announce a date for a formal summit meeting sometime between April and July. One said an earlier date seemed the likeliest possibility. But American officials said arms control was not at the top of either leader's list of issues for their first meeting since the disintegration of the Soviet Union and the emergence of Russia as the successor to the old Soviet state. Mr. Bush is eager, however, to get more details from Mr. Yeltsin on his recent arms control proposal. The Russian leader's plan was a response to Mr. Bush's suggestion that both sides eliminate land-based multiple-warhead missiles -- the heart of Russia's deterrent force -- in exchange for a one-third cut in the number of nuclear bombs the United States keeps aboard submarines. Mr. Yeltsin replied by calling for even deeper cuts than Mr. Bush suggested, and by proposing that the United States abandon its ""Star Wars"" antimissile program in favor of a global network to protect against missile attack. The Bush Administration's initial response to that proposal was cool. Because the two proposals remain inchoate and because the United States is still unclear about Mr. Yeltsin's arms control philosophies and the depth of his knowledge and engagement on the issue, the two leaders are expected to confine their pronouncements on nuclear disarmament to a vague commitment to ""continue the process."" ""Bush expects most of the discussion tomorrow will be on economic reform,"" a senior official said in New York."
