"To the Editor: ""Christopher Gives Turks Plan to End Rights Abuses"" (news article, June 13) reports from Ankara that Secretary of State Warren Christopher has asked Turkish leaders to cooperate with a detailed United States proposal to help end widespread human rights abuses in Turkey. Mr. Christopher also indicated that the United States would reward ""better behavior"" by Turkey with economic cooperation and favors. Unfortunately, you also report: ""At the same time, the United States announced that it would provide Turkey with $336 million in aircraft and other military equipment."" One wonders what ""better behavior"" the Clinton Administration was rewarding. You quote Turkey's Acting Prime Minister as having told reporters: ""Today I would challenge any country to come up and say they have a better human rights record than ourselves."" Yet Turkey's human rights picture has become worse in the last year and a half. In our recent missions to Turkey, we have found routine police torture of both political and common criminal suspects during interrogation. Moreover, Turkish security forces continue to shoot and kill peaceful demonstrators and to shoot and kill suspects in house raids, rather than arresting and trying them. In southeast Turkey more than 500 people were assassinated last year. The Turkish Government has utterly failed to investigate these deaths and prosecute those responsible. Fifteen journalists have been assassinated since February 1992. Journals and newspapers are confiscated and banned. Reporters are beaten, detained and tortured, and journalists continue to be tried and sentenced for such offenses as ""insulting"" Ataturk or the military, or ""disseminating separatist propaganda."" Kurds in southeast Turkey are detained and tortured, and forced either to act as ""village guards"" for the security forces or to leave their homes and lands. Denied their cultural identity, Kurds continue to be sentenced for singing Kurdish songs. It is a crime to speak Kurdish at a trial or in another official setting. All of these appalling violations of human rights indicate how important it is for the Clinton Administration to use its influence to persuade Turkey to change drastically its human rights behavior and not to ""reward"" Turkey until significant changes take place. LOIS WHITMAN Deputy Director, Helsinki Watch New York, June 17, 1993"
