"With a shy smile and a steady glance, P.J.  McClean came into the kitchen and said hello. As an Irishman visiting from the North, from County Tyrone, he had been invited to the friendly house here on Ogden Street to talk of his country's endless troubles before some of this city's unofficial human rights community. As it turned out, they told him of troubles of their own. ''It looks like a rough, lean four years with the Reagan Administration,'' one American said to Mr. McClean, a 55-year-old village schoolteacher who is chairman of the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association, a group that deals with the Irish troubles as a nonviolent issue of human rights rather than as a matter of territorial struggle. ''With Carter's human rights emphasis gone, the cold warriors are back and no one's going to be pushing Britain to do something about Ireland,'' Mr. McClean, a small man with wispy red hair, was told. The meeting of two dozen people had an international, academic tone, with Cheddi B. Jagan, the former Prime Minister of Guyana, listening as closely as a professor from a nearby university was.  The gathering had a touch of a kitchen wake about it, too, as one or two recently departed employees of the State Department's bureau of human rights told what it was like to be on the outs now that the new Administration had de-emphasized human rights in foreign policy. A Home for Rights Group They got a sympathetic ear from Laurie S. Wiseberg and Harry M.  Scoble, who use their home on Ogden Street as headquarters for the Human Rights Internet, one of a number of private groups in Washington that monitor the world's troubles, not just Ireland's.  Before P.J. McClean there was a talk by Karabo Motlana from South Africa earlier this year, and a visit by Israel Shahak to speak on Palestinian rights, and there have been, and will be, others, said Miss Wiseberg. Mr. McClean listened carefully and talked of human rights not so much in the abstract as in terms of County Tyrone, telling of how the great civil rights movement of American blacks inspired Irish men and women 15 years ago and of how he has since done time in prison as the price of his own involvement. In some precincts back home he is admired as one of the original 14 ''hooded men'' who complained of British treatment when the program of mass internment without trial was introduced in 1971. Eventually he prevailed as a witness before the European Court of Human Rights, which drew a concession from the British Government that it had used torture techniques against the Irish. A student or two in the group seemed to need clarification, provided by Mr. McClean, about the deep distinction between his group and the violent Provisional wing of the Irish Republican Army whose ''production line in martyrs'' is denounced by the civil rights group. He can expect more of this sort of curiosity and ignorance as his brief visit brackets St. Patrick's Day, an occasion he finds somewhat puzzling on this side of the Atlantic and drenched as much in stereotype as it is in malt and barley. Overemphasis on Festivities ''It seems to some extent to bear out the truth of what has been said about the States' Irish,'' Mr. McClean said in one conversation about the American celebration. ''It seems to me to have an overemphasis on the festive occasion, to put it mildly, without really getting people fully aware of what should in fact be taking place.'' The point, he said, should not be in marching by with a simple banner saying that Britain should ''get out of Ireland.'' Rather, he said, intelligent politics requires a detailed review of the current state of affairs, a situation that is sadly dormant and ''most explosive'' in the area of human rights, he said. The point is not merely to confront the British presence and responsibility in Ireland, he said, but rather to discuss and propose solutions. Mr. McClean knows he is treading on somewhat sacred parade ground in discussing the ''States' Irish'' and their St. Patrick's Day. It should be pointed out that he has nothing against fun and celebration. Back home in the village of Beragh, he said, he gets along well with his 300 neighbors, the Protestant majority included.  Until the internment program, he was always tolerated as a mere street talker on civil rights, not a clandestine troublemaker, he said. He and his wife, Annie, work hard to see that their 11 children practice the peace preached at meetings and the dinner table by their parents, he added. ''We settle things in debate, not by hitting the children,'' Mr.  McClean said. House With Barred Windows The large family lives in a special house on Beragh's Main Street.  It is a landmark building, a former police barracks once embattled in the original modern Irish troubles of 60 years ago, with barbed wire and window bars still in place. ''It sounds poetic, your living there,'' P.J. McClean was told.  ''I prefer to say it's ironic,'' the schoolteacher replied.  As these and other details of his existence, happy and sad, were recounted in conversation, it became clear how P.J. McClean is living some of the things only sung about on this side of the Atlantic. A jaunty lyric lately popular on a lot of Irish-American tavern jukeboxes, ''But my sons have sons/ Brave as were their fathers,'' does not fall festively from his lips. At parting, Mr. McClean accepted the routine wish for a ''happy St. Patrick's day.'' He had no idea what he would be doing in America that day, he said, but had hopes of speaking to another group, trying to explain something about Ireland."
