"born Nazi-hunter who tracked down Klaus Barbie in Bolivia, told an audience in the county last week that ''most'' of the 76,000 French Jews deported to death camps during World War II ''would have been saved if France had refused to help the Nazis.'' Cooperation between the wartime Vichy Government in Paris and France's German occupiers declined, she said, ''only after the summer of 1942, when the public realized the French were separating children from their mothers before deportation.'' Then, she said, ''there were protests.'' It was ''not that there were such feelings for the Jews,'' Mrs.  Klarsfeld said, ''but people were touched by the human side of it.'' In an hourlong account of her work before 400 people at the Westchester Jewish Center in Mamaroneck, it was the human side of the wartime tragedy that Mrs. Klarsfeld emphasized. ''Barbie is only one case,'' she said, referring to the wartime Gestapo chief of Lyons who was extradicted to France in February by Bolivia after a Socialist Government ended years of military rule in La Paz. Mrs. Klarsfeld and her husband, Serge, a lawyer, had identified the 69-year-old former Nazi as Klaus Altmann, a Bolivian citizen since 1951. In 1952 and 1954 Mr. Barbie was convicted in absentia and condemned to death for war crimes, including the killing of Jean Moulin, the French Resistance leader. There is a 20-year French statute of limitations to war crimes, but not to ''crimes against humanity,'' and Mrs. Klarsfeld said he will now stand trial for deporting and shooting Jews in specific incidents. ''Barbie is still proud of his crimes against the Resistance fighters,'' Mrs. Klarsfeld said. ''He called them terrorists, and we know from Vietnam this is nothing new, but he never spoke of crimes against the Jews. He said, 'I never touched a Jew,' '' she said. Mrs. Klarsfeld, a Christian, was born in Berlin 1939 and knew little of the wartime events until her move to Paris in 1960 and marriage three years later to Mr. Klarsfeld, a Jew whose father was a member of the French Resistance and died in Auschwitz. In 1968, Mrs.  Klarsfeld, in a widely reported incident, slapped Chancellor Kurt-George Kiesinger at a dinner in an attempt to focus attention on the former West German leader's Nazi past. Much of her subsequent activities and those of her husband similarly have focused on drawing attention to Germany's wartime past. ''My country is divided into two ideological blocs,'' she told her Mamaroneck audience, ''but every German has a responsibility for the deaths of millions.'' It is ''not a collective guilt, especially for the young,'' she said, ''but a collective responsibility.'' The Klarsfelds have received death threats, seen their parked car blown up and have been beaten, arrested and jailed. ''But we have to be active,'' she said in crisp, accented English. ''I am not a conference woman; there are beautiful ideas in meeting halls, but one has to act on the spot. Our aim was never vengeance.'' Once, in an attempt to kidnap Kurt Lischka, the wartime Gestapo chief in Paris, Mr. Klarsfeld ''fired an empty pistol at him, just to demonstrate that if we wanted vengeance, we could do it -we want them jailed.'' Mrs. Klarsfeld and her husband have identified former Nazis, the majority in West Germany and some holding responsible post-war positions, in a continuing effort to bring them to trial, she said.  The Lischka incident, for which Mrs. Klarsfeld received a two-month jail sentence, also led to a French-German treaty that enables German courts to try former Nazis already convicted in France. A woman asked how the Klarsfelds found the former Nazis, and the answer was disarming: ''You just get the names and track them down'' She said Lischka had come from Cologne ''and we assumed he would return there, so I called the telephone operator and he was listed in the book.'' The problem was not finding their quarries, but getting them to trial, she indicated. Another questioner wanted to know about how the Klarsfelds ''interacted'' with Simon Weisenthal, whose work in hunting former Nazis began soon after the war. Mrs. Klarsfeld praised Mr.  Weisenthal's postwar interviews with concentration camp refugees and his information center in Vienna as ''extremely important,'' but ''he is in his 70's and we are doing what he is not doing.'' ''Why are American Jewish organizations not getting involved in your work?'' Mrs. Klarsfeld was asked. Her answer prompted a burst of laughter: ''The rule is that organizations never support individuals,'' she said, but added that ''individuals like you can help us,'' through the Beate Klarsfeld Foundation, P.O. Box 137 South Deerfield, Mass. 01373. Her appearance was videotaped by students from Mamaroneck High School. Michael Witsch, the school's television coordinator, said the tape would be made available to teachers, to UA-Columbia for use on its local access cable stations and for organizations. He can be reached at 698-9000."
