"Serge Klarsfeld, a lawyer and Nazi crime researcher who campaigned for more than 10 years to have Klaus Barbie brought to trial in France, asked a court today to sentence Mr. Barbie to life imprisonment for crimes against humanity. Mr. Klarsfeld spoke as Mr. Barbie's trial, in which today was the 25th day, turned to its final phase: the hearing of summation statements by the more than 40 lawyers involved in the case. The final statements of lawyers representing more than 100 civil plaintiffs against Mr. Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of Lyons, will be heard over the next 10 days. That will be followed by statements by the Government prosecutor, who is also likely to ask a sentence of life imprisonment, the stiffest possible penalty, and by Mr. Barbie's defense lawyer. A verdict is expected early next month. Mr. Barbie, who has boycotted most of the trial, was not in the courtroom today.  Victims' Lawyers Play a Role French legal procedure allows lawyers representing the victims of a crime to play a major role in criminal trials. They can present evidence, call witnesses, and try to convince the jury of a defendant's guilt. Lawyers for the civil plaintiffs went in detail over the evidence presented so far in the case, trying to prove the main prosecution contention: that Mr. Barbie, as the head of the Gestapo in Lyons, was responsible for the crimes against Jews and members of the French Resistance that were committed there. Mr. Klarsfeld, whose research was responsible for locating Mr. Barbie in Bolivia in 1971, represents the surviving relatives of 44 Jewish children seized on April 6, 1944, at a refuge in the village of Izieu, some 50 miles east of here. The children were eventually deported to Auschwitz, where they were put to death. Mr. Klarsfeld, whose father was seized by the Gestapo in Nice in 1943 and killed at Auschwitz, evoked the memory of the children seized at Izieu, naming each of them and, in some cases, reading extracts from letters they wrote to parents who, in most cases, had already been deported. At the end of each brief description of a deported child, Mr. Klarsfeld repeated a kind of refrain: ''He didn't come back.''"
