"A car bomb exploded here today in a street crowded with Christmas shoppers outside Harrods, the department store, killing 5 people and wounding 91 others. There were no immediate claims of responsibility for the blast, but Scotland Yard officials said they were convinced it was the work of the Irish Republican Army. The dead lay with the wounded on the rubble-strewn street as the remnants of the explosive-laden car and others caught in the explosion burned fiercely. Wrapped Gifts Strewn About Some of the wounded, covered with blood and stunned by the explosion, sat numbly, waiting for help. Distinctive olive-and-gold Harrods shopping bags lay in the gutters, spilling brightly wrapped gifts into the street. Among the dead were a police sergeant and a policewoman who had responded to a telephoned report received minutes before that a bomb was in the area, the Knightsbridge section. Other policemen were wounded, three of them seriously. Fourteen civilians were also seriously wounded. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, who visited the scene tonight, described the attack as a ''wicked crime against humanity and a crime against Christmas, too.'' ''It's difficult to understand the minds of people who can do that,'' she said. ''There are very evil people in our society, and we have to do everything we can to catch them.'' 11 Killed in July 1982 It was the worst terrorist attack in London since I.R.A. bombs killed 11 British soldiers in two separate incidents in July 1982. In one of these attacks, which took place in Hyde Park just a few blocks northeast of Harrods, a bomb planted in a car went off as members of the Queen's Household Cavalry rode by on horses. Placing remote-controlled bombs in a road or inside a vehicle has been a standard terrorist tactic of the I.R.A. in Northern Ireland, where the paramilitary group has used violence for 14 years in trying to end British rule there. Today's blast blew out large display windows in the Harrods building and sent flying glass into shoppers inside the men's department, which is closest to the street. A black cloud of smoke boiled into the sky high above the building's distinctive earth-colored Victorian facade. Cut and bleeding shoppers, including children, stumbled into Brompton Road, where traffic was thick with black taxicabs at curbside and scarlet double-decker buses carrying shoppers along the wide street, which also contains many fashionable smaller shops. The attack came on what officials said appeared to be the busiest shopping day of the Christmas season. Thousands of people were inside the five-story department store and milling on the streets outside when the blast occurred shortly before 1:30 P.M. (8:30 A.M. Saturday, New York time).  Scotland Yard officials said the explosives had been placed inside a car parked on a side street named Hans Crescent, where liveried chauffeurs sat in black limousines waiting to pick up shoppers. The officials said they suspected that the bomb had been detonated by remote control as a squad of police officers began a search for it. The London police had warned the public that the I.R.A. planned a pre- Christmas bombing campaign. Earlier in the week a bomb was discovered in the Kensington-High Street shopping district and detonated harmlessly by a bomb squad. The explosion today paralyzed a large area of Knightsbridge and Kensington. The police sealed off an area of half a mile on both sides of Harrods for several hours during a search to insure that there were no other bombs. Oxford Circus Area Evacuated The busy shopping district surrounding Oxford Circus about a mile and a half to the east was evacuated after the police received a call saying a bomb had been planted there. The police kept reporters and cameramen from the immediate scene of the explosion, and no clear reports were available as to the extent of the structural damage to Harrods and other buildings on the street. Mrs. Thatcher said the bomb had been placed in a narrow side street to maximize its effect. The devastation was extensive, she added. ''I think the police have suffered very badly,'' the Prime Minister said. ''When they receive information about these devices they have to go to the scene and clear people away. We owe a lot to the bravery of the police.'' Twenty minutes before the bomb went off, Harrods employees were alerted to the possibility of danger.  A female clerk in the store's perfume department said a coded message over the public address system had signaled all departments to begin a methodical search for suspicious packages that might contain a bomb. This was apparently a reaction to a telephone call minutes earlier to a public service group called the Samaritans saying a bomb would explode at Harrods. About 10 minutes later, at 1:20 P.M., the police at the Chelsea station received a call saying a bomb was to go off shortly outside Harrods. A squad was sent to search the streets around the store, but no attempt was made to evacuate the store itself, according to employees. ''All of a sudden there was a tremendous explosion that shook the building,'' said one of the clerks, ''and people started screaming and running.'' One Harrods shopper, Harry Aspey, had just stepped outside the store with his wife and two children when he paused to light a cigarette. ''As I did so, the world seemed to come to an end,'' Mr. Aspey said after being treated at a hospital. ''I found myself lying on the pavement in deep glass, and Christine and the children were lying in the roadway. The police picked them up and rushed them away.'' While there was panic outside, shoppers inside the store quickly quieted down and began an orderly evacuation, a staff member said. ''It could have been terrible with all the children trampled in that crowd, but the shoppers were fabulous,'' said the clerk, who did not give her name because she said it was against store policy for employees to speak with the press. The Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Sir Kenneth Newman, said tonight that 10 to 15 pounds of explosives had been used outside Harrods. He said the man who made the call to the Samaritans used a code word known by the I.R.A. According to the commissioner, the caller said: ''This is the I.R.A. Car bombs outside Harrods. Two bombs in Harrods. One in Oxford Street. One in Littlewoods, Oxford Street.'' All but one of the tips were false, but they kept the city and its emergency forces convulsed for most of the afternoon, turning the busiest intersections into cordoned-off ghost towns."
