"Pope John Paul II delivered his Christmas message today to a world he described as ''scandalously'' marked by human rights violations, starvation, oppression and mass suffering. Referring to himself as ''the Bishop of Rome, the successor of Peter and one of the human beings on pilgrimage toward the end of the second millennium,'' John Paul said he wanted to put the words of Jesus into the ''context of the signs and needs of our times.'' Wearing a gold miter and vestments, the Pope spoke at noon from the central balcony of St. Peter's Basilica overlooking St. Peter's Square. Thirty-thousand people were standing below in the chilly air under a gray sky. Tree and Manger in Square A 52-foot-high Christmas tree and a nativity scene with a life-size manger stood in the middle of the square. John Paul gave his traditional message ''Urbi et Orbi'' - ''To the City and to the World'' - after saying mass in the basilica before 10,000 people. It was his third mass for Christmas. He rose early to say a 7 A.M. mass in his private chapel. On Christmas Eve he conducted midnight mass in a crowded basilica. In his noon message today, the Pope quoted from the New Testament book of Titus, repeating the Christmas message that ''we should live sober, upright and godly lives.'' Referring to himself, he added: ''He repeats it as one defenseless in the midst of a world that is armed and too often defeated by the temptation of arrogant power and oppression. 'Rights Scandalously Violated' ''He repeats it forcefully in a world where there are still people dying of starvation and where human rights are scandalously violated and a mass of suffering weighs upon humanity.'' He added: ''Men and women listening to me, the more human world of which Christ the Lord, born in Bethlehem, is the first fruit, is a world inhabited by a new people that knows how to be sober with regard to the resources of the universe and wise in the use of the energies of its own mind, for it knows how to resist the false mirage of a progress that is indifferent to moral values and looks only to the immediate and material advantage.'' After delivering his speech in Italian, the Pope began his Christmas wishes for peace in 51 languages. Beginning with French and then English, they included Maltese, Afghan, five Indian languages, Vietnamese, Tagalog and 12 Slavic languages. The longest message came last and was in his native Polish. He then gave his blessing to the crowd and to his radio and television audience, and the Vatican said it had been transmitted to 22 countries. The Vatican said the midnight mass had been transmitted live to 40 countries. At the end of his message, John Paul raised his hand in the sign of the cross, granting television viewers plenary indulgence, or the full pardon of temporal punishment for sin. TV Indulgences by Bishops Under church law, only the Pope can extend plenary indulgence, which Popes have done by radio and television for several years. John Paul traditionally grants it twice a year - on Christmas and Easter - to those in St. Peter's Square as well as the broadcast audience. For the first time this year, the Vatican announced that bishops may grant the faithful in their dioceses indulgences by radio or television three times a year. Bishops normally can grant only partial plenary indulgence, and previously they were allowed to extend the full pardon in the name of the Pope only to those actually attending a service. The Vatican said the action was taken to allow those who could not travel to their bishop to receive the indulgence. ---- Little Town Is Crowded BETHLEHEM, Israeli-Occupied West Bank, Dec. 25 (AP) - Thousands of pilgrims from around the world crowded into the Church of the Nativity today to sing and pray in a variety of languages over the place where Christians believe Jesus was born. Masses were conducted nonstop in the grotto beneath the church, where some pilgrims waited in line for up to 30 minutes to touch the 14-point silver star marking the traditional birthplace. Working Holiday for Christians Christmas was a working holiday for most of the 15,000 Christian residents of this Palestinian town in the Israeli-occupied West Bank. The rest of the town's 50,000 people are Moslems. ''Most Christians in Bethlehem depend on tourism, so we have to work on Christmas,'' said Anwar Saca, 40, who owns one of the town's largest souvenir stores. Celebrations today were subdued, in contrast to the often-boisterous activities on Christmas Eve. The Israeli radio said the police had arrested one pickpocket and had booked 40 people for drunken behavior. George Samour, director of the local tourism office, said fewer tourists attended Christmas Eve celebrations than the 5,000 he estimated came last year. Bethlehem's Mayor, Elias Freij, a Greek Orthodox Christian, held his traditional Christmas Eve reception, which was attended for the second straight year by Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel."
