"Anton Koslov traveled from New York City to Ottawa recently to tell anyone who would listen about his father. The young immigrant from the Soviet Union explained that his father, Lev Timofeyev, had been arrested in Moscow last March and charged with ''anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda'' after some of his writings were published abroad. And Juta Gallus-Schmidt came from Stuttgart to plead for her children, Claudia and Beate. Mrs. Gallus-Schmidt and her husband served two years in prison for trying to flee East Germany until West Germany paid to get them out, she said, but East Germany kept her children. People telling these and other poignant stories of heartbreak and separation descended on Ottawa when a six-week conference of experts on human rights opened May 7. The conference convened to review the progress made on humanitarian measures in the 10 years since the measures were endorsed by 35 nations at a conference in Helsinki. The petitioners told their stories to sympathetic reporters and to each other. But they could not get to the delegates inside the conference hall. The Canadian Government sealed off the hall behind barricades watched by guards. The relatives stood outside, thrusting leaflets at passers-by. Some human rights groups that wanted their representatives to attend the meeting were indignant that they could only be escorted in as temporary guests by delegates. ''If the subject matter of the review conference was questions of war and peace or national security, I would understand,'' said Ludmilla Thorne, a director of Freedom House, the New York-based human rights organization. ''But this is an exclusively human rights meeting and I can't get into the building.'' The Soviet Union insisted that the working sessions, which are to go on until June 18, be closed to the press and public. The Western countries had to follow suit, since there is no provision for the conference to take place openly. The secrecy of the conference led frustrated activists to accuse those attending of doing nothing. One of the activists was Avital Shcharansky, who joined a demonstration here on behalf of her husband, Anatoly, who has been denied permission to emigrate and has spent nearly nine years in Soviet prisons. ''Each time when the 35 countries meet, they just give agreement to the Russians to continue this barbaric game with human beings,'' Mrs. Shcharansky told reporters in front of the Soviet Embassy. In fact, the discussions moved from tactful generalities to specific cases and criticism of opposing systems. The chief of the Soviet delegation, Vsevolod N. Sofinsky, complained in an interview that the American delegation had used ''lies, slander and disinformation.'' The Soviet Union wanted each country to confine itself to explaining its own progress on human rights, without pointing fingers at others. Once the United States and its allies began detailing abuses in the Soviet bloc countries, the Soviet Union said racism, unemployment, housing shortages and high education costs violated human rights in the West. After Sir Anthony Williams, the British delegate, called the picture of human rights in Eastern Europe ''a very grim one,'' Mr. Sofinsky asked why no newspapers in Scotland were published in ''the Scottish language'' and hailed what he called the martyrdom of Bobby Sands, an Irish Republican Army member who starved himself to death in a Belfast prison. Most Western delegates say they feel that the Soviet delegation seems to have adopted a strategy of stonewalling and obfuscation. ''We talk about human rights and they talk about unemployment and racism,'' said Richard Schifter, the United States delegate. ''Rather than making them think we are running away from these issues, we need to respond clearly to them.'' On Wednesday, Mr. Schifter said that a human rights meeting was not an appropriate forum for social and economic problems, but that since the Soviet side had brought them up, ''let me say that we are prepared to join in that debate.'' Mr. Schifter charged that the Soviet Union's living standard was one-third that of the United States, that rationing of consumer goods was a fact of Soviet life, that housing space for Soviet citizens would approach current Western standards only in 150 years and that the Soviet Union led the world in per capita consumption of hard liquor. He concluded by cataloguing the privileges of the Soviet elite. ''All animals are equal, but some animals are more equal than others,'' Mr. Schifter said, quoting from George Orwell's ''Animal Farm.'' The Soviet delegate replied by blaming the United States for the arms race. Last week, Mr. Schifter said in a speech that the United States was interested in better relations with the Soviet Union, including an arms control agreement. But he said the Soviet Union's performance on human rights was ''inextricably linked to all aspects of improved bilateral relations.'' Some journalists saw a linkage between human rights and arms control that Mr. Sofinsky picked up. ''Dead men are not very interested in human rights,'' he said. Mr. Schifter explained in a subsequent interview that he was not contradicting Secretary of State George P. Shultz, who said last October that arms talks would be kept separate from other Soviet-American issues. ''I would say the arms negotiations in themselves stand on their own two feet,'' Mr. Schifter said. But he referred to remarks by members of the United States Congress who visited the conference recently. They told reporters that the Soviet Union's violations of human rights could affect the willingness of Congress to ratify an arms-control agreement."
