"Making his first defense against charges of crimes against humanity, Klaus Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of Lyons, said at his trial today that he was not responsible for the atrocities that took place here during the German occupation. ''When I heard the accusations against me, I believed I was in front of the Nuremberg tribunal,'' Mr. Barbie said after a six-hour reading Monday and today of the formal indictment against him. ''It sounded as if I had really behaved like a madman, that I had killed all the Jews,'' Mr. Barbie said. ''But we were only 120 men. We were just a commando team. I wasn't the responsible official.'' Mr. Barbie's statement, coming on the second day of his trial here, was cut short by the presiding judge, Andre Cerdini, who had asked if Mr. Barbie had any comments to make on a procedural motion by his lawyer, Jacques Verges, to dismiss the case. But Mr. Barbie, 73 years old, apparently misunderstood the judge's question. Standing in the glass-enclosed defendants' box, he began a speech in German, in a gravelly voice, that seemed to indicate the main lines of his defense. It was, in essence, that as a relatively junior officer in the Gestapo, he was under the command of the German Army, which bears responsibility for the atrocities committed in Lyons during the German occupation of the city from 1942 to 1944. ''When I heard the charges yesterday and today, I thought that I must have been the master of Lyons,'' he said. ''But I was under the authority of the army.'' Mr. Barbie's attempt to minimize his role in Lyons had been predicted by lawyers representing more than 100 civil plaintiffs in the case, who have argued that, despite his relatively low rank as a lieutenant, Mr. Barbie had effective control of the Gestapo in Lyons and full power to carry out atrocities here. The indictment read aloud in the courtroom Monday and today, which lists many specific accusations of the torture and deportation of Jews and members of the French Resistance, identifies Mr. Barbie as the chief of Section IV, the overall Nazi security office in Lyons. Section IV, according to the indictment, was the same thing as the Gestapo and was responsible for several things, including the fight against Communism and sabotage as well as what was called the ''anti-Jewish struggle.'' The indictment portrays Mr. Barbie as a particularly cruel and sadistic official who personally carried out what were called ''re-enforced interrogations'' of prisoners, meaning the use of torture to extract information. In the preparation of the case, Helmut Knochen, the head of the Gestapo in France who served a prison term in Germany for war crimes, testified that security operations were the responsibility of each head of Section IV in France, including Mr. Barbie in Lyons. Thus, the indictment asserts, Mr. Barbie had responsibility for the particular operations he undertook. When Mr. Barbie deported Jews from Lyons to the temporary detention center in Drancy, near Paris, he knew that the intended result was for them to be killed in the death camps of Poland or Germany, according to the indictment."
