"President Francois Mitterrand's Socialist Government today raised France's minimum wage by 10 percent, increased social security benefits and told banks, oil companies and the rich that they face higher taxes. The Cabinet, in its second session of the new Administration, also abolished some of the practices of the Gaullist administration that have been criticized in the past. It agreed to ask Parliament to disband the State Security Court, which tries suspected spies and terrorists in secret without right of appeal. Rights Protection Bolstered The Government also said citizens could now sue it for breaches of human rights by using the machinery set up under the Council of Europe. This Strasbourg-based organization, now numbering 20 member countries, was founded in 1949 to promote European unity and uphold parliamentary democracy. Under the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights, signed in 1950, a European Commission investigates alleged rights violations and submits its findings to a European Court of Human Rights, whose jurisdiction has been recognized by 13 countries. Today's Cabinet session also decided on a resumption of nuclear tests at its underground sites in the Pacific, ending a three day suspension ordered by the new Defense Minister, Charles Hernu. But the Government confirmed a decision to halt construction of the Plogoff nuclear power station in Brittany. And it gave itself three months to draw up a new energy policy that would reconcile a slowdown of the nuclear power program with a reduction of oil imports. Finally, the new Foreign Minister, Claude Cheysson, said that there would be ''a period of profound reflection'' about relations with the rest of Europe. Most of France's West European partners have already concluded that the new Government will be unable to negotiate seriously for several months. While a meeting of government leaders this month in Luxembourg will give President Mitterrand a chance to meet some of his colleagues for the first time, it is unlikely to produce any major decisions. By starting to carry out promised programs immediately, the Socialists hope to strengthen their appeal in the legislative elections. The elections, scheduled for June 14 and 21, will determine whether President Mitterrand will have enough support in the new Parliament to govern effectively. Today's economic decisions represent the first stage in a plan to reduce unemployment, now at 1.7 million, by stimulating the economy despite inflation and an imbalance in foreign trade. Other Western countries continue to make inflation-fighting their top economic priority, believing that unemployment will start falling only when prices are more stable. But the French Socialists are trying to move the economy into high gear by stimulating demand. More Funds for Low-Cost Housing Last week, President Mitterrand made available $1.18 billion from a special budget account for building low-cost housing. And within the next few weeks the Government plans to take additional expansionary mesures, including the creation of 220,000 new civil service jobs. Today's measures will cost the Government about $1 billion this year and $3 billion in 1982. Part of this money is to be found by increasing taxes on banks, oil companies and the rich, assuming that the new Parliament will approve. The minimum wage and social security benefits can be raised by government decree and require no parliamentary action. The 10 percent increase in the minimum wage, raising it to the equivalent of $503 a month, affects only 1.5 million low-paid workers. But others are expected to ask for matching increases despite a government appeal not to seek increases along the entire wage scale. The Socialists are saying almost nothing in public about their past pledges to nationalize the biggest industrial companies as well as all private French banks and insurance companies. Such measures are believed to be unpopular with moderate voters, whose support the Socialists are now seeking. The new leadership is also being cautious about its pledge to cut the work week to 35 hours. This would threaten to make French industry less competitive with other West European countries."
