"According to the elaborate French procedure, the jury and the judges had to answer 341 specific questions on the guilt of Klaus Barbie. To 340, they said yes. The last question asked whether there were mitigating circumstances, and that answer was no. Then sentence was pronounced, permanent imprisonment for crimes against humanity. So the two-month trial of the 73-year-old Nazi whom the French call the ''Butcher of Lyon'' ended before dawn last Saturday. There is no longer a death penalty in France. Mr. Barbie had already been tried for war crimes in absentia and sentenced to death, but at that time he was hiding in Bolivia. The 20-year statute of limitations had run out on other charges that could have been made. Crimes against humanity was the only remaining legal charge that could be brought for his part in the Holocaust. He was given the last word before the jury retired. He denied all guilt, but added: ''I fought the Resistance, which I respect, with hardness; but it was war and the war is over.'' He had refused to attend most of the trial, avoiding the terrible stories of the witnesses. He showed no sign of regret, contrition, even awareness of what the regime he served had meant. With stubborn, breathtaking composure, he relied on the ironic argument that he was being tried illegally because he had been brought from his refuge in Bolivia to stand trial in France by force, though with the agreement of the Bolivian Government of the time. Indeed, the norms of French justice were applied with meticulous precision, demonstrating the contrast of the rule of law and the atrocities perpetrated by the Nazi authorities when they held sway. It was an honor and a triumph for France. The trial could not bring back the dead nor undo the sufferings recounted. But it added a victory for the very concept of government by law to the military victory that restored its existence in France. There had been many complex fears before the trial was held. French collaborators had aided Mr. Barbie and his men, and Mr. Barbie's defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, had given notice that he would seek to raise the whole story of shared guilt and shame. American counterintelligence had employed Mr. Barbie after the war, shielding him from prosecution and arranging his escape to South America. Massacres have occurred in other countries since 1945, and Mr. Verges claimed that no one is pure enough to pass judgment on others for crime against humanity. But in the end, embarrassment didn't matter. The trial was held with great dignity despite the wrenching emotions unleashed, and it served its most important purpose, which was to history and to education. No cameras, radios or television are allowed in French courtrooms, although the proceedings were recorded on tape for the archives, sealed until 2007. Thus the press had the key role in fulfilling the trial's pedagogical function. Like the jurors, most of the reporters were under 40. They discovered they really hadn't known much of what Nazism was about, what went on during the occupation and the war, how ordinary people were removed from ordinary lives to another world of nightmare and death. They realized that the aged survivors who came to testify had carried their horrors closed in their memories for two generations and needed to talk while they still could. Tamar Golan, an Israeli reporter who covered the trial, said afterward that she was deeply moved by the response of the young people, mostly non-Jews, to the unbearable knowledge that was spread before them. She paid tribute to the French journalists ''who took it as a mission to bring out the truth, to tell what had happened, to provide the perspective.'' But, she added, the trial had left her with a new sense of fear. It made her aware of ''how simple it all was, how easy it had been to organize the machinery which took people to another planet inside a city that goes on living normally.'' For that reason, too, it was courageous of France to conduct the proceedings, and salutary. The important lesson wasn't so much the Nazis' extraordinary evil but that it could happen with the participation of so many, the indifference of many more, that humanity has no guarantees against its vicious streaks except in its own conscience, for which each individual is responsible. The defense had been free to raise any arguments, relevant or not. The prosecution had to prove its allegations. Finally, the weight of evidence, the weight of truth, the weight of decency won out. Mr. Barbie is right that the war is over, and the trial is over, but the effort for decency and justice must go on every day, everywhere."
