"To the Editor: U.S. delegates to the Madrid meeting to review the Helsinki accords cited numerous violations by the Soviet Union of its pledge to foster the freer movement of people, ideas and information. The message registered with Moscow, but its response was scarcely the one anticipated.§ince the meeting recessed on Dec. 19, repression has been stepped up against Soviet citizens who are monitoring their country's compliance with the Helsinki Final Act. Moscow believes it can end Western complaints by cutting off channels of information, by denying citizens all means of expressing their thoughts and by confining the more stubborn civil-rights activists in labor camps and psychiatric prison hospitals. The mathematician Alexander Lavut has been sentenced to three years in a labor camp for ''slandering the Soviet system.'' He was accused of working for ''A Chronicle of Current Events,'' the samizdat journal which Amnesty International republishes in the West as ''an authentic and reliable source of information.'' The radiologist Leonard Ternovsky and the paramedic Alexander Podrabinek received three-year terms for reporting on the misuse of psychiatric confinement. Two Estonian nationalists, Mart Niklus and Juri Kukk, have also been sentenced to labor camp, and Felix Serebrov of the Moscow Helsinki Watch Group, has been arrested. Suppression of information must not become a substitute for compliance with international obligations. President Reagan can act upon his announced intention to maintain ''a vigorous and consistent human-rights policy'' by instructing his representative to denounce recent violations when the Madrid meeting reconvenes on Jan. 27 and by insisting on the fulfillment of existing humanitarian provisions before agreeing to new commitments, such as the European disarmament conference advocated by Moscow. President Ford was right when he stated in signing the Final Act at Helsinki in 1975: ''The people are thoroughly tired of having their hopes raised and then shattered by empty words and unfulfilled pledges ... History will judge this conference not by the promises we make but by the prom- ises we keep.'' VALERY CHALIDZE New York, N.Y., Jan. 12, 1981 The writer is editor of the quarterly ''A Chronicle of Human Rights in the U.S.S.R.''"
