"On the question of principle, Britain's Prime Minister Thatcher is right in refusing to yield political status to Bobby Sands, the Irish Republican Army hunger striker. But this dying young man has made it appear that her stubbornness, rather than his own, is the source of a fearful conflict already ravaging Northern Ireland. For that, Mrs. Thatcher is partly to blame. By appearing unfeeling and unresponsive, she and her Government are providing Bobby Sands with a deathbed gift - the crown of martyrdom. It is the dream of a unified Ireland, partitioned by Britain in 1921 to preserve Protestant rule, that nourishes the Irish Republican Army, giving recruits like Bobby Sands the will to die. He was sentenced to 14 years in the Maze prison near Belfast for a firearms offense; other I.R.A. guerrillas have maimed and killed, soiling their cause by repugnant means. To declare that these crimes are somehow lessened because the aim was political would debase justice and open the way to still more violence. No such status has been accorded I.R.A. prisoners in the Irish Republic, and the I.R.A.  demand finds no support from Amnesty International or the European Commission on Human Rights. But there are other areas where the British could honorably yield.  On the petty question of prison clothing, for example: Why shouldn't protesters be allowed civilian clothes provided by their families instead of by prison officials? Isn't it time that the British Government heeded appeals for reforms of a harsh criminal justice system imposed on the province in 1977? And when will Mrs. Thatcher report more fully on her talks in Dublin about new forms of association between the two Irelands? Her inflexibility is augmented by a starchy tone. It was typified by Mrs. Thatcher's refusal to meet with three members of the Irish Parliament who had just visited Mr. Sands: ''It is not my habit or custom,'' she said, ''to meet M.P.'s from a foreign country about a citizen of the United Kingdom resident in the United Kingdom.'' Hauteur like that is calculated to bring out the nationalist worst in the Irish. By stressing only what Britain won't do, Mrs. Thatcher has sadly allowed the initiative to pass to a minuscule army of implacable nationalists. Having elected a dying hunger striker to Parliament, the I.R.A. and its supporters are now poised to elect another prisoner as Bobby Sands's successor. It is a nightmare that won't go away; it will take courage, but also compassion, to end it."
