"Biaggi To the Editor: The suspension of shipments of U.S. arms to the Royal Ulster Constabulary, discussed in your May 28 editorial, must be put in perspective.t was my amendment to the fiscal 1980 Department of State appropriations bill which led to the decision by the State Department to suspend further sales or shipments of United States arms to the R.U.C. pending a full review of our policy. My initial reason for raising this issue in Congress was the incompatability of the sale of arms to the R.U.C. and our foreign policy philosophy -respect for human rights. Section 502 (b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 bars the sale or export of any U.S.  arms to nations or organizations which engage in persistent patterns of human rights violations. The R.U.C. has been charged by both Amnesty International and the British Government-appointed Bennett Commission with human rights violations against prisoners and prison suspects. Earlier this month, one of Ireland's leading legal authorities, Rory O'Hanlon, charged that complaints of brutality made against the R.U.C. remained at ''an alarmingly high level,'' further supporting these charges. On May 16 I was joined by 17 of my House colleagues in a letter to Secretary of State Muskie reaffirming our support for the suspension. We wrote, ''When the Department instituted this policy, it demonstrated that our commitment to human rights was universal.'' The fact is, the Administration has been far more than obliging. The President, last December, met with Prime Minister Thatcher and reaffirmed the suspension. Finally, the leadership provided by the Irish National Caucus on the issue of suspending arms shipments is fully consistent with their role as the leading Irish-American organization working for peace, justice and human rights for Ireland. We value our relationship with the United Kingdom and always have.  Our hope is that there will come a time when the R.U.C. will again be able to receive United States arms. That time cannot and will not come until there are major improvements in their human rights record. The genius of Lord Carrington was demonstrated best by the peace settlement which led to the new nation of Zimbabwe. However, his analogy about Iran constitutes more of a fault than a triumph. Our position in Iran is wholly consistent with our policy in Ireland. In both instances, we are motivated by a high sense of morality. Guns should not be sold to police organizations which do not respect human rights. We consider it morally right to ask our allies to impose sanctions on the Government of Iran for their illegal and immoral holding of our citizens for some 200 days. It is the British - in both cases - who are engaging in selective morality.  MARIO BIAGGI Washington, May 29, 1980 The writer, who represents New York's 10th District, is chairman, Ad Hoc Congressional Committee for Irish Affairs."
