"After a day of parliamentary disorder, Spain's Foreign Minister, Jose Pedro Perez Llorca, opened the fulldress sessions of the East-West conference on human rights and cooperation in Europe late last night even though the 35 member nations remained in disagreement on an agenda. Momentarily breaking an impasse that still threatened to sabotage the conference, Mr. Perez Llorca appeared just before midnight in the Palacio de Congresos, proclaimed the conference open and then immediately adjourned it until tomorrow. He also organized a working group that will attempt to hammer out ground rules to guide future proceedings. His intervention was precipitated by a refusal by the Hungarian delegate to cede the chair in stalemated procedural discussions so the conference could go into its main session as scheduled. ''It's a coup!'' exclaimed the head of a neutral delegation. ''I have never seen anything like this in my life.'' Faced with what appeared to be a hardening Soviet position on the ground rules for the conference, which is to review the Helsinki accords of 1975, the caucus of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization states had proposed that the clock -symbolically stopped just before midnight on Monday - be allowed to run. Western Maneuver Is Undercut This, according to Western diplomats, would have obliged the Soviet Union either to give ground on outstanding procedural matters or to take responsibility for sabotaging the main conference. But the action of the Hungarian, Janos Petran, which several Western delegates declared to be illegal, undercut the Western maneuver. Mr. Petran held the rotating chair on Monday, but with the clock stopped, he remained as chairman of the preparatory session through yesterday. The at-times riotous procedural wrangling appeared to raise even deeper doubts among a number of Western diplomats about the possibility of holding the full conference, which according to one timetable was to run until March 5. ''I'm afraid what's happening in there is a little bit a picture of the state of the world,'' a diplomat said during a coffee break.  ''It's not very good, is it?'' Since the preparatory session opened on Sept. 9, the Soviet delegation has attempted to whittle down the amount of time that would be devoted in the main conference to such politically embarrassing issues as human rights violations and the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan. With diplomats from Austria, Switzerland and Norway acting as gobetweens, the delegations of the Soviet Union and of members of the Atlantic alliance appeared several times to be near a compromise that would effectively limit such debates to about four weeks. Soviet Seeks Three-Week Limit But, late yesterday, the Soviet position hardened, and its envoys, led by Leonid F. Ilyichev, a Deputy Foreign Minister, said they wanted that phase limited to three weeks. They also wavered on a commitment to holding a another follow-up meeting. The first such meeting was held in Belgrade in 1977-78. So far, Spain and the 15 member states of the Atlantic alliance have displayed unity against the Soviet bloc. The Soviet Union has been seeking to preserve discipline among its allies, as shown yesterday, during a break, when Mr. Ilyichev lectured his caucus in a public hallway like a schoolmaster, wagging his finger. Poland and Rumania, as well as some neutral nations, fear that the collapse of what is called the ''Helsinki process'' will deprive them of a forum in which they can speak outside the influence of military blocs. Polish delegates were reported to have made special pleas for the holding of another review conference after the Madrid sessions. Atmosphere of Harmony Damaged Whatever the outcome of the procedural dispute, the atmosphere for holding a full-scale conference with a modicum of harmony appears to have been damaged by the tactics of the Soviet bloc, in the view of diplomats. ''The Soviets want to make it clear that any meeting in Madrid has to stay within certain boundaries,'' reasoned one Eastern European.  ''They don't want to promise another conference after Madrid so that at any time they can blackmail the neutrals and others with stopping the whole process.'' Moreover, increasingly, the tortuous bargaining, concerning such apparently small things as the position of paragraphs on a document, or quarrels over words like ''table'' compared with ''propose,'' seem connected with the taut international situation. ''Hanging over all this,'' said a Spanish diplomat, ''is a thing which nobody dares speak about but everyone is thinking about - and that thing is called Poland.'' The ups and downs of the unsettled situation in Poland are followed intensely by many delegates, and one pessimistic interpretation of the Soviet Union's behavior is that it has decided it does not want to have a major international conference under way if it decides it must intervene militarily in Poland. The Madrid gathering has attracted emigres from the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe as well as people of Eastern European descent.  Today, in protest over Soviet behavior, Maris Kirsons, an American citizen of Latvian descent, spilled blood from his wrist onto a Soviet flag. He was taken away by the police."
