"The Government has decided not to comply with last month's ruling by the European Court of Human Rights that British law permitting the police to detain suspected terrorists for up to seven days was a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights. The British law is aimed mainly at the threat of terrorism in Northern Ireland, and affects mostly suspects of the outlawed Irish Republican Army, and the Government's decision is not related to the Pan Am crash Wednesday. Home Secretary Douglas Hurd told Parliament on Thursday that rather than comply immediately with the court ruling, Britain will derogate, or withdraw, from the applicable sections of the convention until it decides what its final policy will be. Britain became party to the accord in 1950. ''It remains our wish to find a judicial route through this problem if this can be achieved,'' he said, but because of the threat of terrorism in Northern Ireland, he added, the police continue to need to be able to detain suspects for up to seven days in some cases. The applicable articles of the human rights convention provide that anyone arrested by the police must be brought ''promptly'' before a judicial officer, and be assured of the right to appeal to a court for release. Article 15 allows signatories to derogate ''in time of war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation.'' Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Government argues that I.R.A. terrorism is such a threat and it is treated as such in the British press. Until the crash of the Pan American jet in Scotland bumped it off the front pages, the biggest news last Wednesday was the discovery of a suspected I.R.A. bomb factory in south London, where more than 100 pounds of high-powered explosive was found. A nationwide hunt for two armed occupants of the apartment is still under way. Last month, the Government introduced a Prevention of Terrorism bill extending existing law that allows the Home Secretary to extend the normal pre-arraignment detention period of 48 hours by up to five additional days. The bill is now in the committee stage, but is expected to be passed next year. Some Conservative legislators are thought to be in favor of outright derogation from the human rights treaty, since I.R.A. suspects, in particular, are allegedly skilled at resisting police interrogation techniques, and developing evidence to charge them with crimes sometimes takes longer than 48 hours. The Home Office apparently wants to establish a judicial review procedure that would put British practice in compliance with the court ruling, with the option of putting Northern Ireland in a special, exempt status. The human rights court's decision Nov. 29 came in the case of four men from Northern Ireland, Terence Brogan, Dermot Coyle, William McFadden and Michael Tracey, who had been arrested in 1984 and held for periods of from four days and six hours to six days and 16 and a half days, but never charged with any crime. They sought compensation, exhausted their avenues of appeal under British law, and took their case to the European Commission of Human Rights, which referred it to the human rights court, a 19-member body from as many different countries. The justices ruled, 12 to 7, that all four defendants had been denied their right to be brought ''promptly'' before a judge or other judicial officer."
