"The leaders of 41 French-speaking nations and territories began a summit meeting here today to the accompaniment of angry human-rights demonstrations. The group, the French-speaking world's counterpart to the Commonwealth, was meeting for only the second time at the level of government leaders, after an initial conference in Paris 18 months ago. The hope is to turn the organization into a powerful forum for fostering economic and technical aid, as well for promoting French language and culture, in countries with a combined population of about 300 million. But arrangements here underlined the still tenuous nature of the organization. Major political issues that divide the members - for example, the occupation of Cambodia by Vietnam, which is represented here by its vice premier, Nguyen Huu Tho - have been kept from the agenda. So too has any discussion of human-rights abuses, which are said to be widespread in many member countries, particularly in Africa. As the meeting opened to speeches by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney and by President Francois Mitterrand, among others, several hundred protesters made their feelings known on a sidewalk outside. Groups from Burundi, Somalia, Cambodia and Vietnam, most of them composed of people now living in Canada, kept up a steady barrage of cries that rose to crescendos as motorcades arrived and departed. Suppressed Tension Mr. Tho, the Vietnamese vice premier, looked uneasy as security men led him down a red carpet to his car, barely 50 feet from a wall of Cambodian and Vietnamese demonstrators venting their anger through bullhorns. Another target of the protests was the Burundi president, Jean-Baptiste Bagaza, who heads an administration accused by its opponents of complicity in a massacre 13 years ago of as many as 300,000 members of the Hutu tribe. Even Canada and France, nations at the hub of the organization, were meeting in an atmosphere of suppressed tension. Although the differences that the two countries had over Quebec for the last 20 years have been largely resolved, there are new strains because of French concern that Canada intends to challenge French commercial primacy in former French colonies in Africa and Asia. The atmosphere was not helped when the French Prime Minister, Jacques Chirac, told an interviewer on the eve of the summit meeting that Canada had de Gaulle to thank, at least in part, for its success in overcoming the Quebec problem. When de Gaulle visited Canada as the French President in 1967, he set off a furor by pronouncing the rallying cry of Quebec separatism - ''Vive le Quebec libre!'' - from the balcony of Montreal City Hall. ''I think this gave to Quebec a real push, and a good one,'' Mr. Chirac told the English-language radio network of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. ''Today, what do you see? No more problems.'' Amnesty International Involved If the remark was intended as a backhanded compliment to Mr. Mulroney, a native Quebecer who recently signed a constitutional accord with the province, it was judged by many Canadians, including Quebecers, to be a clumsy one. Even now, with separatism seemingly receding as a threat, issues that have been at the heart of the tensions here for two decades, including Quebec's role in international affairs and its attempts to make French the province's only official language, remain sensitive affairs. But Mr. Chirac's remarks were a relatively minor worry for Mr. Mulroney beside his concern for the conference to go smoothly, without any major disruption over human rights. The issue received major attention here last week when Amnesty International, the human-rights group, issued a report alleging that two-thirds of the nations attending the summit were guilty of human-rights violations. The report cited instances of torture, summary execution, and other forms of abuse of prisoners. Among the 30 nations indicted by the document were Benin, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Congo, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Laos, Lebanon, Mali, Niger, Togo, Vietnam and Zaire. The presidents of three of the countries, Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire, Mathieu Kerekou of Benin and Amin Gemayel of Lebanon, were among the seven speakers invited to address the summit at its opening session. Canadian officials defended the decision to avoid discussion of the allegations, at least in the formal sessions. In his speech, Mr. Mulroney spoke of the ''fragility'' of the organization, and a similar point was made by Foreign Minister Joe Clark at a news conference on Tuesday. ''I don't think there was a realistic prospect of our finding agreement on some of the human rights questions,'' he said."
