"The trial of Klaus Barbie for crimes against humanity turned today to what is widely seen as the single most horrific charge against him - responsibility for the arrest of 44 Jewish children and their deportation to the gas chambers of Auschwitz. Mr. Barbie has maintained that he was not linked to the Nazi campaign of genocide against Jews and that, as the Gestapo chief in Lyons, he was engaged only in hunting down French Resistance fighters. On the first of three days of hearings on the charge, Mr. Barbie was again absent from the courtroom, after being forcibly returned Tuesday. The court heard evidence today from a handful of people who recalled April 6, 1944, when German Army trucks rolled up in the morning in front of a farmhouse in Izieu, 50 miles east of here, and 44 Jewish children were dragged away from an unfinished breakfast. Sabina Zlatin, a naturalized French citizen from Poland who is 80 years old, said she founded the Izieu home in 1942 after losing her job as a military nurse because she was Jewish. About 80 Jewish children had been smuggled to safety in Switzerland from the Izieu home. And on April 6, 1944, Mrs. Zlatin was away arranging for another group to be sent when she received a telegram saying: ''Family ill. Contagious disease.'' The code words told her the Nazis had come to Izieu. Immediately Mrs. Zlatin went to Vichy to plead for the children's lives with the collaborationist French Government, but she got nowhere. ''Why do you bother about those dirty Jews?'' a senior French official told her. Turning to the empty dock, her voice rising until it reached a kind of scream, Mrs. Zlatin said: ''Barbie said he was only concerned with the Resistance and enemies of the German Army. I ask who were those 44 children? Were they Resistance fighters? They were innocents. There can be no pardon, no forgetting this odious crime.'' Another witness, Dr. Leon Reifmann, 73, told of arriving at Izieu with two boys the morning of the raid. Mr. Reifmann managed to escape from the house through an upstairs window, but not before he saw a civilian with the German soldiers who he thinks was Barbie. While Mr. Reifmann hid in the garden, his father, mother, sister and nephew were taken away to their deaths with the rest of the occupants of the home. Lea Feldblum, 69, a Polish-born Jewish woman and the only survivor of the children and adults rounded up that day, told today of their journey to Auschwitz. Although she held forged French identity papers, she revealed her identity to stay with the children. Arriving at Auschwitz on April 15 with 34 children and the Reifmann family, she was forcibly separated from the children, who were gassed the same day. The remaining 10 children and 3 adults were sent to the Auschwitz gas chambers a few days later. The only witness who said he was certain that Mr. Barbie was present at the Izieu raid was Jacques Favet, 68, a retired farm laborer. Mr. Favet said he had watched the children being kicked and thrown into the trucks ''like sacks of potatoes.'' Of Mr. Barbie, he said: ''I recognized him on television in 1972. And I broke down completely when I saw that picture.''"
