"Klaus Barbie, asserting that he is a ''hostage, not a prisoner,'' declared today that he would no longer take part in his trial for crimes against humanity. The move, which came as a surprise here, seemed certain to change the nature of a trial that had been seen as an occasion for Mr. Barbie, the wartime head of the Gestapo in Lyons, to be directly confronted by some of his declared victims. ''From now on, this will be a debate among lawyers,'' said Marek Halter, a writer who is a spokesman for the Jews of Lyons. ''We will not have the opportunity to see Barbie face to face with his accusers, having to answer to the very people who will point their fingers at him and say, 'You tortured me, you put me on the train for deportation.' '' Addressing the court, the Government prosecutor, Pierre Truche, called Mr. Barbie ''Herr Nein,'' or ''Mr. No.'' ''He refuses to face what he has done,'' Mr. Truche said. ''He was a triumphant Nazi when he had in his hands people who could not defend themselves. Today he is a shameful Nazi who doesn't want to face his past.'' Looks Old and Pale In the first two days of the trial, Mr. Barbie, 74 years old, was often silent and expressionless, sitting in a glass-enclosed box to the right of the podium. He is very pale, his deep-set eyes almost entirely obscured by dark eyebrows. He looks old and somewhat frail and speaks in a soft, gravelly voice, though he appears to have no trouble following the proceedings or arguing on his own behalf. A thin smile has seemed often to play over his lips, an expression interpreted by some as a calculated sign of contempt for the court. Mr. Barbie announced his intention of walking out of the proceedings today at the end of a series of questions asked by the presiding judge about his personal history, a procedure that normally precedes the taking of testimony in a French criminal trial. At the end of the questioning, the judge, Andre Cerdini, recounting that Mr. Barbie had been expelled from Bolivia and turned over to the French authorities, asked if he agreed with the facts as stated. ''No, I am not in agreement,'' Mr. Barbie said, speaking in German through a court interpreter. ''My extradition was not legal. It was a violation of Bolivian law and of international law. I consider myself a hostage, not a prisoner.'' Then, after asking if he could read a brief statement, Mr. Barbie, speaking without any apparent emotion, said: ''I would like to say to the judges and the members of the jury that I am being detained here in an illegal way. I am the victim of a kidnapping.'' Asserting that since being brought to France four years ago, he had been the victim of ''a lynch atmosphere, a campaign of vengeance being led by the French media,'' he said, ''I have no intention of appearing before this tribunal, and I demand that you have me taken back to St. Joseph Prison.'' Mr. Barbie and his lawyer, Jacques Verges, have stated many times in the past that Mr. Barbie's expulsion from Bolivia, where he had lived as a businessman for 32 years, was illegal. The Court of Cassation, the highest court in France, has rejected this argument. French Law Permits Absence Mr. Barbie's decision to make no further appearances at his trial, which was due to start hearing witnesses next week, is permitted by French law, and the tactic has been used in recent years by other defendants. Earlier this year, Georges Ibrahim Abdallah, a Lebanese terrorist leader, who was also defended by Mr. Verges, refused to appear at his trial for the murder of two diplomats in Paris, saying he did not recognize the right of the court to judge him. In most criminal proceedings in the United States, the defendant must be present for the trial to open, and he has the right to be present at all stages, but a trial can proceed without the defendant if he voluntarily absents himself. ''It is a terrible affront to the real victims for him to portray himself as the wronged person,'' said Beate Klarsfeld, a war crimes researcher who led the campaign to have Mr. Barbie brought to trial here. ''It is the reaction we always have with Nazi criminals. As soon as they are in the box, they start to become victims, and they refuse to account for their actions.'' The trial will hear dozens of witnesses describe the actions ascribed to Mr. Barbie as the Gestapo chief in Lyons, in particular the torture and deportation of hundreds of Jews and members of the French Resistence. Nonetheless, there is no question that Mr. Barbie's presence in the courtroom had given the trial much of its fascination for the French, who have long known him by the epithet ''the Butcher of Lyons.'' Before being escorted from the courtroom today, Mr. Barbie, answering the judge's questions about his past history, had presented himself as an ordinary man with laudable values. Asked, for example, what was his opinion of the Nazi theory that Jews, gypsies and Slavs were ''inferior races,'' Mr. Barbie said: ''I have no hate toward these minorities. I don't know the word hate.''"
