"Klaus Barbie was returned to court against his will today to confront some of those who say he tortured them in prison here 43 years ago and sent them to Nazi camps. Although several other former Resistance fighters have identified Mr. Barbie during pretrial investigations as the man who tortured and deported them, they did so privately in his prison cell. This was the first time Mr. Barbie, who is on trial for crimes against humanity, had been brought face to face in open court with those who say they were his victims. One by one, five former Resistance fighters, four men and a woman, climbed the nine steps to the witness stand directly before the judge's bench. Each in turn formally identified Mr. Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of Lyons, as their torturer. Some threw insults at him and once the courtroom burst into spontaneous applause. But Mr. Barbie, who walked out of his trial two weeks ago saying he was illegally kidnapped from Bolivia four years ago, repeated his claim today and refused to answer any questions. A few minutes earlier, the courtroom fell silent when Judge Andre Cerdini ordered Mr. Barbie brought forcibly back to the trial to be identified by witnesses who had recognized him only from photographs and television films. After a short delay, those in the courtroom could hear steps on the staircase from the cells below. Mr. Barbie, wearing a gray suit and a white shirt, shuffled slowly into the dock, was released from his handcuffs and shook hands with his lawyer, Jacques Verges. As Lucien Margaine, the first witness, stood in the box, Judge Cerdini, speaking softly and slowly, detailed the tortures Mr. Margaine has said Mr. Barbie inflicted on him, recalling that he was beaten with a whip and a chain and half drowned in a bath of water. Then the judge asked him if he recognized Mr. Barbie as his torturer. ''I recognize him formally, formally,'' Mr. Margaine cried out. ''I could not be mistaken. Look at that grin, that smile.'' Leaning over the edge of the bench and looking down at Mr. Barbie in the dock below, Judge Cerdini then asked him to reply to the charges leveled against him.  'What a Coward!' But Mr. Barbie, speaking gruffly in German, read out a short statement asserting again that he was being tried illegally and that he was brought into court today constrained by force. ''Because I am judicially absent, I will not reply,'' he said. And from that moment on, Mr. Barbie declined to answer questions put to him by members of the court. ''I've got a few questions to ask him,'' Mr. Margaine then said. And the courtroom burst into applause when he shouted at Mr. Barbie: ''Is this the courageous SS officer we knew? What a coward!'' Next came Mario Blardone, who told the court on Monday that he had suffered much the same tortures as Mr. Margaine and, like him, had been deported to a concentration camp. Turning to the dock, Mr. Blardone cried out: ''This face. I want to look him in the eyes. These cold eyes. See, he is closing his eyes. I don't want to stand before this cowardice. I recognize him.'' Once again Mr. Barbie declined to answer the judge's questions about the accusations being made against him, muttering a brief ''No.'' Then it was the turn of Robert Clor, who said he had been hung up by his hands and beaten by Mr. Barbie. He, too, recognized the man in the dock, who said nothing. Next came Vincent Planque, a captured French Army officer who escaped to join the Resistance. ''In my conscience it is him,'' Mr. Planque said. ''It's he who captured me and tortured me - beatings, setting dogs on me, the bath torture. There's no doubt about it.'' Finally came Raymonde Guyon, a Roman Catholic doctor who with her husband helped smuggle Jews out of France and ran a Resistance newspaper. ''I'm going back 40 years,'' she said. ''I recognize him absolutely. That man! It was he who interrogated me, tortured me. It was he who told me my husband would be shot - and he was.'' Lamentable, Lawyer Says Mr. Barbie just shook his head, with that frequently noticed shadow of a smile on his lips, and said nothing. But when the judge asked him before ending today's session if he would reply on Wednesday to questions about his own career, he said: ''I don't know. I must consult my lawyer.'' Afterward, Mr. Verges, Mr. Barbie's lawyer, called today's hearings ''lamentable'' and ''more like a circus than a court.'' He said Mr. Barbie had misunderstood the judge's closing question and was unlikely to return freely to court to answer any questions. ''I have no reason to think his position has changed,'' he said."
