"A subsidiary of the giant Flick industrial empire paid an indemnity of over $2 million today to a New York-based organization representing the interests of Jews who were used as slave laborers by the Nazis. The payment by the Dusseldorf company, Feldmuhle Nobel A.G., brought to a conclusion a long attempt by the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany to obtain reparations for about 1,300 survivors among the Jews who were forced to work in gunpowder factories during World War II. Most of them were young women from Hungary and Czechoslovakia who had been deported from Nazi death camps to work for Dynamit Nobel, as the company was then known. The sale last month of most of the Flick holding company to Deutsche Bank, West Germany's largest private commercial bank, prompted Robert M. W. Kempner, the former deputy American counsel at the Nuremberg war crimes trials, to urge that steps be taken ''to rid the company of the stigma of nonpayment of reparations to the surviving victims of slave labor.'' Flick Reneged in 1960's Mr. Kempner's initiative, first reported on Dec. 16, was endorsed by the New York-based Claims Conference and led to the reopening of a dossier that had been closed since the 1960's, when the Flick concern reneged on a pledge to pay the group five million West German marks. This was the sum, worth $2.049 million at current exchange rates, deposited today at the Claims Conference's Frankfurt bank. The conference's president, Rabbi Israel Miller, today expressed his pleasure at the ''prompt response'' by Deutsche Bank to the group's latest initiative. ''The Claims Conference,'' Rabbi Miller said, ''acknowledges the readiness of Dynamit Nobel to finally provide a small payment to Jewish slave laborers who toiled for Nobel during the war.'' A statement issued by Feldmuhle Nobel said the payment had been made ''on humanitarian grounds'' and in accord with Deutsche Bank, which paid $1.8 billion for much of the Flick empire in the biggest takeover in West German history. The renewal of the claim prompted a controversy this week. Hermann Fellner, the domestic affairs spokesman of the right-wing Christian Social Union, told a Cologne newspaper that he saw ''neither a legal nor a moral basis for this demand by the Jews,'' and he added, ''The fact that it comes up now creates the impression that Jews are quick to show up whenever money tinkles in German cash registers.'' The remarks by the Bavarian politician stirred angry protests. Heinz Galinski, a Jewish leader in West Berlin, denounced the statement as ''outspokenly anti-Semitic'' and said he was ''reminded of times that I thought belonged to the past.'' Called 'Misunderstood' The Christian Social Union, the Bavarian wing of the governing Christian Democratic Party, quickly disassociated itself from Mr. Fellner's remarks and asserted that the politician had been ''misunderstood.'' The Bavarian party is led by Franz Josef Strauss, who has traditionally maintained close ties to Israel. The Flick concern has been in the news for several years because of allegations that it paid bribes to a range of West German politicians. The allegations have led to a trial in Bonn of two former economics ministers and a former Flick general manager. Flick was the only major West German corporation to refuse payment of wartime indemnifications. In 1964 it agreed to pay five million marks to the surviving former laborers, but the payment was never made. In 1970 lawyers for the company announced that there would be no payment. The resolution of the claim today defused a growing embarrassment for Deutsche Bank. It also removed the issue before a visit to West Germany at the end of this month by Prime Minister Shimon Peres of Israel. The Claims Conference was founded in 1951 to negotiate reparations from the new Federal Republic of Germany on behalf of various national and international Jewish organizations. The following year it concluded an agreement with the Government of Chancellor Konrad Adenauer that provided for indeminities for victims of Nazism. In the 1960's, the Claims Conference reached accords with several major German industrial groups - among them Krupp, I. G. Farben, Siemens and A.E.G. - that had used Jewish slave labor or otherwise exploited Jewish prisoners. According to Saul Kagan, the organization's executive director, these payments totaled more than 50 million marks, about $20 million at today's exchange rates. No Breakdown on 1,300 Survivors Mr. Kagan said the payments from the Nobel settlement concluded today would probably go to Jews living in Israel, the United States, Canada, Australia and other nations where they settled after the war. But he had no immediate breakdown on the whereabouts of the roughly 1,300 survivors who had filed for reparations in the last two decades. The original Nobel company was founded in 1865 by the Swedish engineer Alfred Bernhard Nobel, the inventor of dynamite who financed the Nobel Prizes. The company had its headquarters in Hamburg, and by the eve of World War II it had come under German control and had consolidated dozens of German munitions companies. During the war, the company was part of the I. G. Farben group, but Friedrich Flick, the founder of the Flick dynasty and an early financial supporter of Hitler, sat on its board. The Flick holding company took full control of Nobel in 1959. In 1947 the Nuremberg trials sentenced Mr. Flick to seven years in prison for his role in helping bring Hitler to power, but he was pardoned four years later by John J. McCloy, the American High Commissioner for Germany."
