"French prosecutors expect to try Klaus Barbie for crimes against humanity by the end of the year, but the case they have developed against the former Gestapo chief of Lyons will not involve the torture and murder of France's greatest Resistance hero. As evidence against Mr. Barbie is assembled by the investigating magistrates and the charges against him are pared down, it has become clear that the trial will deal with three specific charges, instead of the eight originally announced. The three charges exclude Mr. Barbie's role in the arrest and death in 1943 of Jean Moulin, the underground chief, and the Nazi police official's campaign of repression against French Resistance fighters. If lawyers' evaluations are correct, the case against Mr. Barbie, who is 72 years old, will concentrate on about 800 of his Jewish victims, offering a microcosm of a beastly system rather than a confrontation with the Nazi mechanism on its widest, most brutal scale. No Revelations 'for All Time' ''This is not going to be a great trial for history,'' said Serge Klarsfield, a lawyer representing families whose relatives were deported to Nazi death camps on Mr. Barbie's orders. Referring both to Mr. Barbie's campaign against French Resistance fighters and his persecution of Jews, Mr. Klarsfield added, ''There won't be any revelations for all time. ''Barbie,'' he said, ''was a local chief who dealt very harshly with the French Resistance movement and Jews. He was not a figure of the magnitude of other Nazis who have been brought to trial. The Barbie persona is greater than the real personality that will face the court. The Barbie who hid in South America, the Barbie who is accused of killing the head of the Resistance movement - he won't be on trial.'' Since Mr. Barbie was expelled from Bolivia and brought back to France in February 1983 to stand trial, the prosecution has been refining its case, hearing witnesses and interviewing Mr. Barbie for what is expected to be its presentation of a bill of particulars in April or May. Although no official statement has been made, Pierre Truche, the general prosecutor, made clear in an interview that the investigating magistrate, Christian Riss, had reduced to three the number of incidents covered by the charges against Mr. Barbie from the eight Mr. Riss announced two years ago. The explanation, as offered by other lawyers, is that the investigating magistrate had to eliminate any situation that could be narrowly and technically defined as a war crime, such as the execution or torture of underground fighters. Under the statute of limitations, Mr. Barbie, who was sentenced to death in absentia by French courts in 1952 and 1954 for war crimes, may no longer be prosecuted for them. Crimes Against Humanity But crimes against humanity, involving genocide or racial persecution, are not so proscribed, and Mr. Barbie is to stand trial on three charges of this type, the lawyers said. They relate to the deportation of 650 people, most of them Jews, to the Auschwitz and Ravensbruck camps, the deportation of 86 people arrested at the Lyons office of the Jews of France Committee and the deportation to Auschwitz of 44 children from a home for Jewish children in the village of Izieu. This means that the prosecution's case will not center on the Resistance movement in Lyons or on Mr. Barbie's participation in the torture and murder of Jean Moulin, the Resistance leader. Since Mr. Barbie's return to France, this area of the case has been the most sensitive in terms of domestic politics because Mr. Barbie's lawyer, Jacques Verg es, has insisted that Mr. Barbie would expose ''certain persons who wear medals today who I consider guilty of wearing them illegally'' - in other words, phony Resistance heroes. Considering the difficulty of finding new information to document the new charges against Mr. Barbie more than 40 years after the crimes, ''it's really a miracle, in legal terms, that the investigating magistrate has been able to put together a case,'' Mr. Klarsfeld said. ''They had to find new facts, and that's exactly what they did.'' One of the new and central elements in the Barbie case is a telex message containing a deportation order bearing Mr. Barbie's initials. Mr. Verg es has described it as a forgery.  But Mr. Klarsfeld says the authenticity of the document will be proved in court. If Mr. Verg es tries to move the case away from the prosecution's charges, Mr. Klarsfeld said, ''then, you can assume he'll be brought to order.'' ''But the defense has the right to situate its case in a general context,'' Mr. Klarsfeld added. ''So, even though the charges against Barbie have nothing to do with Resistance, Verg es will be very likely to try to turn the case toward a terrain that is interesting for him.'' Mr. Verg es, who has often been associated with extreme left-wing causes, has said that Mr. Barbie is willing to tell how he arrested Jean Moulin and how he knew about the organizational chart of the Resistance movement. Mr. Truche says Mr. Barbie, who is being held in a prison near the central railway station in Lyons, is visited frequently by his daughter and his attorney. ''His health is that of a man of 72 who had a cerebral incident'' - a mild stroke - ''when he was in Bolivia,'' he said. ''His means are those of a man his age. His intellectual faculties are complete.'' Barbie Charges Poison Attempt LYONS, Feb. 26 Reuters Mr. Barbie received emergency medical treatment in prison today after taking medication that was apparently given to him by mistake but that he charged was an attempt to poison him, judicial sources said. The chief prosecutor's office tonight ordered an inquiry into the incident but said Mr. Barbie's health was unaffected by what it termed ''a mistake in handling'' the prisoner's medicine."
