"It stretches euphemism to describe the fruits of the Madrid conference on East-West security and human rights as satisfactory.  After three years of mostly idle talk, 35 nations will conclude with a ''compromise'' that submits their most serious disagreements to yet more meetings. Why should the United States acquiesce in this charade? Because when all else is deadlocked, meager fruits are better than nothing. Because the compromise keeps alive, without sacrifice of principle, the useful agitation embodied in the 1975 Helsinki accords. And because some narrow gains were obtained for the document that Secretary of State Shultz proposes to sign. For all its frustrations, the Madrid meeting had one redeeming merit. It was the only continuing forum, and at times a vital forum, for Soviet-American discussion. It provided a chance to probe Soviet intentions in private and to complain about objectionable Soviet behavior in public. The main purpose of the conference was to appraise fulfillment of the pledges made at Helsinki: the West's acceptance, absent a peace treaty, of the post-World War II frontiers in Europe in exchange for the East's commitment to the freer movement of peoples and ideas. The compliance has hardly been reciprocal. Soviet citizens risk prison for daring even to ask how their Government is observing the Helsinki pledges. Since the start of the Madrid meeting, at least 500 human rights advocates have been packed into Soviet jails. The emigration of Soviet Jews has been virtually halted. Andrei Sakharov has been denied an exit visa and Anatoly Shcharansky kept meanly in solitude. Yet, tellingly, the dissidents who thus risk the most place the greatest value on the Helsinki ''process.'' For it legitimizes agitation about Communist repression, which was previously denounced as interference in the internal affairs of Eastern European nations.  The concluding agreement at Madrid provides for continuing meetings by ''experts'' about human rights and other Helsinki issues, looking toward the next plenary conference in Vienna. Despite Soviet attempts to dilute the human rights provisions, the pending agreement is said to have elicited promises of some concessions. And a section inspired by Poland's Solidarity would pledge respect for internationally recognized trade union rights.  Pledging will not make it so, but the embarrassments of violations can thus be raised for professedly workers' states. President Reagan retained a skillful Democrat, Max Kampelman, as the American delegate in Madrid. He took charge in a fallow season of East-West relations, through the Afghanistan occupation and martial rule in Poland. With determined civility, Mr. Kampelman has kept Madrid from adding to the frost. The ''confidence-building'' steps now on the agenda, like full disclosure of military maneuvers throughout Europe clear to the Urals, may bring only a token advance. But they are not a retreat. However frail and battered, the hopes nourished at Helsinki persist, surviving conflict, changes of government and even the tedious mealiness in Madrid."
