"To the Editor: P. M. Nixon of the British Information Services suggests that even though there is no right of trial by jury in Northern Ireland for those charged with politically motivated offenses, the ''central principles of criminal justice'' escape unscathed. As a British barrister and author of a recent study of Northern Ireland's legal system, ''Diplock and the Assault on Civil Liberties'' (Haldane Society, London, 1981), I was intrigued to learn from Mr. Nixon that the ''hoary old tales of coerced confessions ...  have long been discredited.'' Hoary old Amnesty International's painstaking documentation of inhuman treatment of suspects in the Royal Ulster Constabulary (R.U.C.) interrogation centers has been fully credited by the British Government itself. I am an eyewitness to Mr. Nixon's ''safeguards ... designed to eliminate any possibility of abuse'' of suspects by the R.U.C. They consist mainly of unrecorded and soundless TV monitors supervised by the R.U.C. and are wholly inadequate to prevent the coercion of confessions. I and other British lawyers asked the R.U.C. last year what right a suspect has to the advice of a solicitor (attorney) during the three- to seven-day interrogation period permitted under Diplock law. We were handed a printed paper bearing these instructions: ''Under no circumstances must the Prisoner be asked 'Do you wish to have a Solicitor?' '' Mr. Nixon states: ''The onus of proving that there was no maltreatment rests squarely on the prosecution.'' This is not true.  Under Section 8 of the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act, a much lower standard of admissibility of alleged confessions is applied than that used in the courts of Britain or the United States. In reality, 86 percent of those accused will have to convince a Diplock judge that the R.U.C. ''more probably than not'' subjected them to ''torture or inhuman or degrading treatment in order to induce (them) to make the statement.'' In his report, Lord Diplock encouraged the most sinister threats of torture (Para. 90): ''It would not render inadmissible statements obtained as a result of building up a psychological atmosphere in which the initial desire of the person being questioned to remain silent is replaced by an urge to confide in the questioner, or statements preceded by promises of favours or indications of the consequences which might follow if the person questioned persisted in refusing to answer.'' Mr. Nixon thinks that only ''terrorists'' support trial by jury. I believe that all Americans support this basic human right. It is vital that we all understand that the Diplock Court system in Northern Ireland, so praised by Mr. Nixon, would be ruled unconstitutional by any court in the United States. RICHARD J. HARVEY, New York, Oct. 21, 1981"
