"IN its way, ''Human Rights'' is a significant documentary. It has a point of view, and it is clear about its message: Communist governments may be heavy-handed, but real ferocity, systematized and calculated, is found only in the West or its dependents and in theocracies. We know whose side we should be on. The 90-minute documentary, part of Channel 13's ''Intercom'' series, will be seen at 11 o'clock tonight. ''Human Rights'' - a production of Thames Television in Britain -stakes out its position early on. It shows us Guatemala. Soldiers in black shirts goose step to kettle drums. A moment later, a priest describes a massacre in an Indian village. A soldier plunged a knife into a 3-year-old boy, and then picked the child up by his ankles and crushed his head against a wall. The priest, who did not see the massacre but was told about it, says that the Guatemalan Army murdered 15,000 to 16,000 Indians from 1982 to 1984. Go then to Viscount Colville of Culross, a United Nations investigator, examining reports of human rights abuses in Guatemala. In one village, farmers tell him that a band of guerrillas was ''handed over'' to the army or perhaps ''surrendered'' - it is unclear which - and that either eight or 18 were then killed. Returning to New York, Lord Colville is interviewed on a plane. He says he has found ''some very positive sides'' to the Guatemalan Government, and that conditions seem to be improving. He says he will file a ''balanced'' report. ''Many people would be surprised you can find anything positive in a country run by a junta,'' the unseen reporter-narrator says. He almost sounds amused. Then we see the priest again. He says it was if Lord Colville really hadn't visited Guatemala. He seems to have been only a Government stooge. The sequence concludes with film of grieving women, although it's uncertain whom they're grieving for. The ambitious documentary -produced and directed by Rex Bloomstein - goes next to Khartoum in the Sudan. President Gaafar al-Nimeiry defends the Moslem practice of cutting off the hand of a thief. Credit Mr. Bloomstein with at least getting down to specifics here; we are told there have been 52 amputations. This is a digression, however, intended to prove only that the documentary has a worldwide view. A moment later, it gets down once again to business. In an interview, Jimmy Carter says, ''If I had it to do all over again, I'd be even more forceful'' in advocating human rights, and that the Reagan Administration has abandoned the cause. In another interview, Elliott Abrams, then the Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, now the Assistant Secretary for Inter-American Affairs, says, ''The main enemy of human rights is the Soviet Union.'' The documentary has us where it wants us now, and it shows us a fetid slum outside Manila. It is ''a rich breeding ground for Communism - a fact which exposes the contradiction in America's human rights policy.'' The contradiction isn't explained, although it's clear the United States is on the side of the oppressor. President Ferdinand E. Marcos is seen in an interview on ''Meet the Press,'' denying ''widespread abuses,'' but it's obvious that he's lying. '' Human Rights'' shows us a Filipino child holding a man's picture. The man was killed by soldiers. ''Human Rights'' knows where wickedness lies. Eastern Europe may have a problem with freedom of expression, but energy and imagination can easily overcome that. Underground writers flourish. Moreover, although ''power resides in the Kremlin,'' the ''spirit of democratic opposition survives'' throughout the Eastern bloc. God knows it's nothing like Guatemala or the Philippines. For the sake of balance then, ''Human Rights'' also interviews a Cambodian refugee in the United States. He says the Khmer Rouge ''have the power of life or death,'' and that 2 million Cambodians have died. This is a brief sequence, shorter even than the one about the 52 amputees. The documentary is hastening to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France. The court, set up by the Council of Europe, is our last, best hope. After all, the United Nations has failed in ''South Africa, Israeli-occupied territories, Chile and other parts of the world.'' Accordingly, we see some causes that are pleaded. A guerrilla of the South-West Africa People's Organization accuses South Africa of atrocities in Namibia. An American says that ''in the U.S. 1,100 persons sit on death row.'' Australian aborigines, Peruvian Indians and Laplanders also make their causes known. The longest interview here is with a man, presumably a member of the Irish Republican Army, who says he was tortured by British soldiers. He speaks somewhat longer than did the Cambodian. ''Human Rights'' is clear about its priorities: The Western democracies are the real enemies of mankind."
