"The Rue Sainte-Catherine in Lyons is one of those European locations that exist in infamy. It was there on a winter day 44 years ago that 86 Jews gathered to discuss how to escape German-occupied France for neutral Switzerland. Instead, they fell into a Nazi trap. The Gestapo raided the meeting. The raid was led, according to surviving witnesses, by a 30-year-old German lieutenant named Klaus Barbie, who was well known in Lyons for his efficient cruelty. Trial Absorbs France The witnesses say he supervised the arrest of all the Jews present. At least 78 were deported to Auschwitz, where all but three were killed. The roundup on the Rue Sainte-Catherine, as that notorious incident came to be called, is one of several crimes against humanity charged to Mr. Barbie, the wartime head of the Gestapo in Lyons. His long-awaited trial is due to start on Monday. The trial, taking place more than 40 years after his alleged crimes, has absorbed, fascinated and disturbed the French as have few other recent events. It has drawn them into an often anguishing examination of their wartime record, including the French role in the deportation of 65,000 Jews by the Nazis. Only 2,800 returned. Nation on Trial Too Many people here view the Barbie trial as a trial of France itself, whose mixed record of resistance and collaboration during the German occupation has never been subject to full public scrutiny. Mr. Barbie was deported to France four years ago after living for 32 years as a businessman in Bolivia under a false name. The United States has been criticized for helping him get to Bolivia after he assisted American military counterintelligence in Europe for several years after the war. Mr. Barbie has long been viewed here as one of the most brutal and sadistic Nazi overlords. He was relatively low-ranking in the Gestapo but had great power to seek out and dispose of those believed to be enemies of the Third Reich in France. A Telling Plaque A plaque at the Montluc prison in Lyons sums up in a few phrases the Nazi occupation, which Mr. Barbie has come to symbolize: ''Almost 15,000 men, women and children were imprisoned here,'' it says, ''hundreds of them tortured - more than 900 shot or massacred in Lyons and in the entire region - thousands were deported.'' Mr. Barbie, dubbed ''the butcher of Lyons,'' will be tried on a variety of charges, including the raid on the Rue Sainte-Catherine and the deportation of 44 Jewish children from Izieu, 50 miles east of Lyons. French newspapers and magazines have been publishing long accounts of Mr. Barbie's life, while giving extravagant coverage to his defense lawyer, Jacques Verges. Mr. Verges is expected to argue that Mr. Barbie was not present at any of the events attributed to him. ''The old phantoms are coming back 45 years later,'' the headline on the cover of Nouvel Observateur, a weekly magazine, said two weeks ago, referring to the likelihood that the trial might focus on collaboration. ''The trial of the SS man Klaus Barbie,'' the magazine said in an article, ''has plunged us once again into the dark waters of the occupation.'' The French have approached the trial with a mix of satisfaction and anxiety. On one hand, many welcome the opportunity to bring Mr. Barbie, however belatedly, to justice, believing it will deepen this country's horror over the Nazi occupation. Seeking a Sense Of Understanding ''The objective of the trial is to deepen our understanding of what happened in Lyons and to enable the younger generation to know and to remember,'' said Henri Nogueres, a historian of the Resistance and one of 35 lawyers representing a large group of civil plaintiffs in the case. At the same time, the sorrowful memories of the war have provoked anguish and a fear that the trial may prove wrenching and embarrassing for France, bringing to the surface wounds and quarrels that never entirely disappeared. ''It's going to be an unpleasant month for everybody,'' the director of an art gallery here said. ''It's a time when everybody is going to have to answer for themselves the question: What were you doing during the war?'' There seem to be two main worries. One springs from the aggressive defense expected to be waged on behalf of Mr. Barbie. In many interviews and television appearances, Mr. Verges has indicated he intends to tarnish the reputation of France itself. Among other things, he has argued that there were traitors and collaborators even among the Resistance groups. Beyond that, there has been opposition to the trial from Jews, including survivors of the concentration camps, who believe that the courtroom procedure will trivialize Nazi genocide and remove what is called its ''specificity'' toward the Jews. Simone Veil, a concentration-camp survivor and former president of the European Parliament, has argued since Mr. Barbie was brought back to France that to put him on trial is a serious error. Inevitably, she says, it will blur the distinction between genocide against the Jews and other wartime atrocities. A Trivializing Of the Holocaust? ''The only important thing for the trial to do is remind us that millions of children, women and men were exterminated in a systematic and scientific fashion, not because of what they did but because of who they were,'' Mrs. Veil said. She pointed out that a French appeals court last year overturned an earlier ruling that would have limited the charges against Mr. Barbie to his actions against the Jews in Lyons. The indictment now includes several charges of deportation and torture of members of the Resistance. Some, like Mrs. Veil, argue that mixing the charges could equalize in the public mind genocide, in which the victims's only crime was to be Jewish, with crimes arising out of the brutality of the war. ''For me it is an important issue,'' Mrs. Veil said. ''The danger is that the Holocaust will be relativized, trivialized, and that would have the effect of reducing the guilt of the Nazis.'' Yet another worry is that the enormous interest the trial has aroused will preclude the sober, dispassionate judgments the occasion requires. About 700 journalists, half of them foreign, are expected to converge on Lyons. The trial will be held in a renovated great hall of the Palace of Justice, since no courtroom could hold the expected crowd. ''The great risk, the paradox of this, is the transformation of the trial into an extraordinary event by the mass media,'' said Alain Finkielkraut, a well-known writer on Jewish affairs and intellectual history. He Was a Nazi, But Not a Major Nazi ''Perhaps it's true that France has not reflected enough on its past, on the collaboration,'' Mr. Finkielkraut went on. ''But I think that a trial, especially one taking place in the glare of all this publicity, is a bad way of examining the past. The trial is being treated as though it were a kind of World Cup soccer match, and the sensationalizing of history is the antechamber of forgetfulness.'' Specialists and researchers on Nazi affairs, including Serge Klarsfeld, the French lawyer who campaigned here for Mr. Barbie's extradition, agree that Mr. Barbie was a relatively minor member among the Nazi chieftains. As a middle-level Gestapo figure, he lacks the historic importance of Adolph Eichmann, who was captured, tried and executed by Israel for his role in helping to carry out genocide against the Jews. Mr. Barbie was recruited into the secret police in 1935. He was 29 years old when he was sent in November 1942 to Lyons, where he headed the Gestapo office. Mr. Barbie's zeal became legendary in Lyons. In 1952 and 1954, he was tried in absentia for torture, the execution of hostages and deportation of civilians. He was condemned to death in both trials. Those crimes, covered by a statute of limitation in France, will not be included in the new trial. Testimony at the two previous trials portrayed Mr. Barbie as a sadistic fanatic who enjoyed flaunting the power of life and death over his victims. Lise Lesevre, a Frenchwoman interrogated and tortured over 19 days by Mr. Barbie in Montluc prison, said in a recently published book: ''His particular pleasure was to turn over a victim with the tip of his boot and then crush his face under his foot, particularly when he thought that he recognized a Jew.'' American Role: Helping Hand for Barbie Mr. Barbie escaped punishment in the years immediately after the war. From 1947 to 1951 he was a paid informant in Germany of the American counterintelligence corps, which was seeking information on the activities of former Nazis in Germany and on Soviet efforts to build an intelligence network in the American zone. In 1951, a campaign began in France to seek Mr. Barbie's extradition to stand trial for war crimes. The counterintelligence service, concerned about his extensive knowledge of American intelligence operations, helped him and his family escape to Bolivia, where he lived under the false name of Klaus Altmann. Mr. Barbie was found in 1971 by Beate Klarsfeld, a German-born war-crimes researcher. She went to Bolivia in 1972 and held a news conference to demand his extradition to France. Mrs. Klarsfeld and her husband, Serge, waged a public campaign against Mr. Barbie over the next decade until he was sent to France in 1982. Much of the fascination that has accompanied the trial's preparation has been intensified by the tactics expected from Mr. Verges, Mr. Barbie's lawyer. A radical leftist, he has made a reputation in France by defending most of its major terrorist suspects. Mr. Verges has made it clear that he intends to call into question French behavior, not only during the war but in subsequent periods, such as this country's long battle against Algerian independence. He is expected to argue that the accusations against Mr. Barbie are no worse than those leveled against the French Army, which is said to have tortured prisoners in Algeria. If French torturers have been amnestied by the Government, he has said, Mr. Barbie should be too. Mr. Verges has also argued that Jewish organizations, including the General Union of French Jews, which was created by the Vichy Government under German domination, were themselves guilty of collaboration, turning some Jews over to the Nazis to protect others. 'Everybody Is Guilty, So Nobody Is Guilty' ''The tactic,'' Mrs. Veil has said, ''is to try to show that everything that ever happened - the Nazi genocide, Hiroshima, Algeria, Vietnam, et cetera - is all the same. Everybody is guilty, and therefore nobody is guilty.'' Veterans of the resistance are also troubled by another argument by Mr. Verges. For many years, Mr. Barbie was best known here for a single alleged act, the torture and murder of Jean Moulin. Mr. Moulin, the most celebrated Resistance hero, was sent by General de Gaulle to direct domestic operations against the Nazis. It has been accepted in France that another Resistance member betrayed Mr. Moulin to Mr. Barbie. The identity of the supposed traitor, never definitively established, has embroiled former members of the Resistance in endless accusations, recriminations, criminal trials and at least one long, complicated lawsuit. Mr. Verges, in many public statements, has claimed that Mr. Moulin killed himself in prison after learning that his closest aides had betrayed him to the Gestapo. ''And so,'' Le Monde commented recently, ''the Barbie affair is not only going to reveal an occupied France that was a zealous auxiliary to its occupier, but also a Resistance capable of turning over one of its own. ''No wonder the Barbie trial is causing fear.'' Nonetheless, many involved in preparing the trial dismiss such fears, arguing that the threats by Mr. Verges to release embarrassing information is a bluff. Mr. Klarsfeld argues that France's willingness to hold the trial, with more than 100 of Mr. Barbie's victims present as civil plaintiffs, is a sign that the fears have been exaggerated. ''I myself am not afraid,'' Mr. Klarsfeld said. ''I bring everything back to the arrival of one of those trains at Auschwitz. That was something far more terrible than anything we are likely to encounter.''"
