"The essence of Ronald Reagan was exposed at Bitburg. Confronted by the most profound questions of man's nature and responsibility, he responded with narrow ideology and distorted history. ''I am a Jew in a world still threatened by anti-Semitism,'' Mr. Reagan said after visiting the German military cemetery. ''I am an Afghan, and I am a prisoner of the Gulag, I am a refugee in a crowded boat foundering off the coast of Vietnam, I am a Laotian, a Cambodian, a Cuban and a Miskito Indian in Nicaragua. I, too, am a potential victim of totalitarianism.'' So freedom-loving people around the world must say today. The rhetoric of that passage was much noted, and it was brilliantly effective rhetoric. But think about the message. Every victim Mr. Reagan mentioned, after the reference to anti-Semitism, was a victim of Communism. He was saying that the serious violations of human rights - the only ones worth mentioning in the shadow of the Holocaust - are all the work of Communist governments. Not a thought there for those who have suffered and died at General Pinochet's hands in Chile, for the Bahai and other victims of religious terror in Iran, for the South Africans who live under institutionalized racist tyranny. Not a word of memory for the Armenians who died at the hands of Turks in this century's first genocide. The point is not to play down the existence of cruelty in Communist regimes. It is to recognize that inhumanity of appalling kinds may appear in all kinds of societies and systems - and must be opposed regardless of ideology. That is one of the most obvious lessons of the history of the Nazi period. There were people who argued, then, that we should not object too strongly to Hitler's racial ideas, because after all he was anti-Communist. Some political excuse can always be presented for closing one's eyes to the horror of an Idi Amin, of the Khmer Rouge, of the torturers in the Argentine generals' regime, of Stalin. The concept of human rights must be universal to have meaning: If we have not learned that, we have learned nothing from what Hannah Arendt called this terrible century. But Ronald Reagan, speaking in the shadow of its most terrible crime against humanity, saw an occasion to make an anti-Communist point. Along with the zealot's one-eyed view of human rights, Mr. Reagan offered an extraordinary version of the great crime that left its imprint all around him: Nazism. In his edited history, Nazi Germany was not a system, not a terrifying mass phenomenon, but the work of one man. ''One man's totalitarian dictatorship'' was the President's phrase for it. But Hitler was not alone. Millions voted for him, mouthed his ideas, hated and killed with him. The horror of Nazism was that ordinary men, or ones who would have been thought ordinary, pushed Jews into gas chambers. And there are still advocates of fascism today. In the Reagan memory, as displayed at Bitburg, there were mostly good Germans: teen-agers drafted into the army, ''soldiers to whom Nazism meant no more than a brutal end to a short life,'' the mother and son in the Reader's Digest story told by Mr. Reagan - who welcomed both American and German soldiers to their cottage in the woods on Christmas Day 1944. ''We do not believe in collective guilt,'' the President said, and he was right. But neither can we rightly close our minds to the terrible knowledge that millions followed Hitler. It is by facing that fact that successive generations of West German political leaders have done so much to create a healthy Federal Republic. A perfect symbol of Mr. Reagan's attitude was his refusal to meet one of the bravest of those leaders, an early anti-Nazi, former Chancellor Willy Brandt. In his speech at the U.S. air base in Bitburg, the President said he had received many letters about his planned visit to the cemetery: some supportive, some concerned, some opposed. He described only one, from a young Jewish woman who recently had had her bat mitzvah. ''She urged me,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''to lay the wreath at Bitburg cemetery in honor of the future of Germany, and that is what we have done.'' The young woman was later identified by the White House press office as Beth Flom, of Marlboro Township, N.J. Miss Flom told The Associated Press that in her message to the President she told him she disapproved of his plan to visit Bitburg."
