"One spring day nearly 20 years ago, a London lawyer named Peter Benenson read in his morning newspaper about two students in Portugal who had been arrested in a restaurant and sentenced to seven years imprisonment for having raised their glasses in a toast to freedom. Mr. Benenson was indignant, as he had been whenever he had read of human rights violations in distant lands, but this time he decided to do something about it. ''If these feelings of disgust all over the world could be united into common action, something effective could be done,'' he wrote, in what he called ''An Appeal for Amnesty,'' which was published in The Observer and Le Monde. Replies and support began to pour in from all over the world, and Mr. Benenson's idea grew into Amnesty International, a worldwide network of more than 200,000 people who use what he called ''the force of opinion'' to combat human rights violations. In 1977, Amnesty International was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for ''defending human dignity against violence and subjugation.'' Amnesty focuses on specific cases of tortur e and unjust imprisonment, which the London-based organiza tion calls ''our fixed mandate.'' But its work over the two decades has also contributed to a general heightening of concern for human ri ghts, reflected not onlyin a bit easier treatment of prisoners by thi s or that despotic government, but also by the existence of new international agreements, forums and conferences, such as t he East-West conference on human rights and cooperation in Europe, no w under way in Madrid. As is often the case when human rights are at issue, some of the data the West has used in Madrid to attack Soviet bloc policies has come from the publications that flow regularly out of the Amnesty headquarters, a littered and busy warren of offices in an old building just south of Covent Garden. Operating on a budget of just over $4 million (all from private donations), Amnesty conducts extensive research and publishes reports that tend to be full of names, dates and other details of unjust imprisonment and such maltreatment as sending Russian dissidents to a psychiatric hospitals when they are perfectly sane. Among journalists and diplomats, and even in the state houses and presidential palaces of some of the dictators and alleged torturers, Amnesty International has built a reputation for being accurate and politically unbiased. ''We neither oppose nor support any government or political system,'' Amnesty declares in its current annual report. ''We are committed to carrying out our mandate regardless of politics, universally and impartially.'' Countries that underwent close Amnesty scrutiny in the past year ranged ideologically from the Soviet Union to Singapore. The organization is proud that while right-wing dictatorships in Latin America routinely denounce it as ''a tool of the international Communist conspiracy,'' the Soviet newspaper Izvestia said recently, in one of the Soviet Union's periodic attacks on Amnesty, that it is ''maintained by imperialist secret services.'' Two years ago, questions were raised about Amnesty's selection of Derek Roebuck, dean of law at the University of Tasmania - and a longtime Australian Communist - as its director of research. Amnesty official Gerhard A. Elston replied at the time that Mr. Roebuck had recently left the party but that in any event he had upheld as an Amnesty member for 10 years its principle that ''every person has the right to freely hold and express his convictions and the obligation to provide a like freedom to others.'' Amnesty, Mr. Elston also said, did not treat ''political belief or affiliation as a condition of employment.'' The scrupulous care that Amnesty takes in its publications sometimes gives ammunition to critics. For example, a naive reader of the current annual report's country-by-country survey could conclude, if he had no other facts, that the state of human rights in North Korea was better than in South Korea. The South Korea section contains several pages of names and dates, while the entry for North Korea notes only that although the country's Constitution guarantees human rights, ''Amnesty International cannot substantiate that the protections guaranteed by the Constitution apply to people charged with political offenses.'' ''Our problem is that we have virtually no information about what's going on in North Korea,'' an Amnesty official explained.  One of the basic tasks of the headquarters is the designation of what Amnesty calls ''prisoners of conscience,'' people who ''have not used or advocated violence'' but have been jailed because of their beliefs, their religion or their ethnic origin. Amnesty currently has 4,100 pri soners of conscience in its files, and each has been ''adopted'' b y one of its 2,400 local chapters, whose members write letters and c ampaign on behalf of their prisoners. Amnesty estimates that its memb ers write at least a million such letters a year to governments. ''You might not think a dictator would care much about public opinion,'' said an organizer of the letter campaigns. ''But our evidence is that they do. Especially in a despotic regime, no one wants to take the initiative of throwing away a letter addressed to the top guy, and there are instances where he gets sacks and sacks of mail from us.'' It is not unusual for the representative of a harsh regime - sometimes even the head of it - to arrive in London and send word through his embassy that he would like to meet with Amnesty to discuss charges that its letter-writing members have been making. The organization takes ironic satisfaction when its figures and tales of horror and torture are cited by regimes that have a shaky human rights record themselves. The Libyan Embassy in London, for example, puts out pamphlets attacking Tunisia with data from Amnesty International. An Algerian newspaper does the same in the case of torture in Chile. Amnesty has welcomed such developments as the Organization of African Unity's decision last year to draft an African Charter of Human Rights, and the United Nations establishment this year of a new working group to investigate ''disappearances,'' a growing form of political execution. Any such development, it believes, is part of what it sees as an increasing acknowledgement that human rights, which despotic governments often assert are i nternal matters, are theconcern of everyone."
