"The French criminal justice system last week was struggling to figure out how to give a fair trial to Klaus Barbie, but the unexpected return in handcuffs of the World War II head of the Nazi Gestapo in Lyons launched a much broader process, a trial that involved France itself. In Lyons, from 1942 to 1944, Klaus Barbie earned the title of ''the butcher.'' He was accused of having put 4,000 people to death and deporting to concentration camps 7,500 others - French Resistance leaders and Jews, mothers, fathers, grandparents and children. A large share of them never returned. For this, he has been charged with ''crimes against humanity'' and placed under heavy guard in Montluc military prison in Lyons. His trial was expected to take at least a year to prepare and many Frenchmen were wondering last week if it would ever take place. He is now 69 years old. His forced return from Bolivia has focused national attention on things that happened 40 years ago, on Vichy and the Resistance, occupation and collaboration, torture and genocide. It is not a history that France likes to remember. From the time of its defeat by the Germans in 1940 until its liberation in 1944, France was a bitter and divided country. While the outside world was fighting World War II, a kind of civil war was raging here between those who wanted to collaborate with the Nazis and those who opposed them. The stories that most Frenchmen have preferred to recall since Klaus Barbie returned to their soil are those of heroic Resistance leaders who refused to crack under Mr. Barbie's torture. That many Frenchmen actually helped the Nazis - and Mr. Barbie himself - is a fact that the left-wing press has pointed out, and that others have admitted, often grudgingly. ''Everybody wants to believe that it was all a bad dream,'' said Bernard-Henri Levy, the philosopher-journalist. ''Everyone wants to believe that foreign doctrines were implanted here. But in fact, we had our own fascism, fascism in the colors of France.'' For the French left, the satisfactions over Mr. Barbie's return would seem to outweigh the discomfort. Some saw his arrival exactly one month before crucial municipal elections as a political coup by the Socialist Government. In its beginnings, the Resistance was only the tiniest of movements and much of its strength came from the left. Once Nazi troops invaded the Soviet Union, the Communist Party became a well-organized force of opposition to the Germans. Many Frenchmen who vote Communist today still explain their politics by referring to the party's often heroic role in the Resistance. The French right, on the other hand, has much to be ashamed of. In his powerful book, ''Vichy France,'' Robert Paxton, an American historian, argued that the regime set up by the Germans at Vichy should not be seen simply as a product of France's defeat in war. Mr. Paxton, whose book is well-respected if much-debated in France, argues that a significant section of the right used the Germans to gain revenge on the left. The Vichy Government was, he argues, a conscious effort to undo the accomplishments of the Socialist-Communist Popular Front Government of 1936. It was an effort at a national right-wing revolution. Yet, as Mr. Paxton and many others also argue, the complications do not stop there. The French right was by no means united behind Vichy. It was, after all, Charles de Gaulle, a powerful nationalist and in many ways a conservative, who led the Resistance and helped save the right from complete disgrace. The Resistance even included many ultrarightists who had no problems with Vichy's ideology but who could not abide having German soldiers on French soil. Conversely, many who later ended up on the left did not necessarily have clean hands in the 1940's. These political questions are only part of the debate. Mr. Barbie's return has also raised the issue of French anti-Semitism, even bringing some of it to the surface. Shortly after Mr. Barbie's arrival, an inscription appeared on a wall in Boussy-St. Antoine that read, ''No to the Jews, yes to Klaus Barbie.'' The writing on the wall hardly expressed popular attitudes. A poll last week showed that a majority would like to restore the death penalty - for Mr. Barbie only. But a Paris news dealer who remarked that ''Barbie is being tried because he killed the Jews and the Americans want to get him for that'' was not alone in his peculiar thoughts. In fact, Mr. Barbie could also be an embarassment to the United States. Last week, the French Nazi hunter Serge Klarsfeld said that Mr. Barbie had worked for American intelligence and that Americans had blocked French attempts to bring him to trial. A Detroit professor, Erhard Dabringhaus of Wayne State University, said he had paid Mr. Barbie $1,700 a month for information on missing Nazis and other data, under orders of his superiors in Army counterintelligence in 1948. ''I don't like to criticize the Americans - they spilled their blood to liberate us,'' said Jean-Jacques Bloch, a leader in the Lyons Jewish community. ''But in this case, your intelligence services seemed to have made a grave mistake.'' In Washington, there were calls for an investigation in Congress and in the Justice Department. For the moment, the government that seems to have gained the most from the affair is Bolivia's new Socialist regime, which lifted the protection that the Bolivian military had provided for Mr. Barbie for decades. By extraditing him, the regime showed how different it was from the military predecessors with whom Mr. Barbie had enjoyed a good deal of influence. As for France, perhaps the hardest truth that Mr. Barbie brought back with him was neatly summarized by the Rev. Lucien Chaisse, a Lyons Jesuit priest who was active in the Resistance. ''In 1944, there were 40 million Resistance fighters,'' Father Chaisse said. ''But in 1940, there were 40 million Frenchmen who supported Vichy.''"
