"Klaus Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of Lyons, went on trial here today for crimes against humanity as Jews and others here commemorated victims of Nazi genocide. The courtroom proceedings today consisted mostly of the selection of a nine-member jury and a formal reading of the charges against Mr. Barbie. He is accused of the torture or deportation during the German occupation of several hundred Jews and members of the Resistance from this area, where Mr. Barbie was appointed head of the Gestapo in November 1942. The actions attributed to him led to his being called the ''Butcher of Lyons.'' Mr. Barbie, whom Bolivia expelled to France four years ago, seemed to smile as he was led, in handcuffs, to his place in a glassed-in defendant's box as the trial opened this afternoon. He nodded in the direction of his defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, and then chatted with his two court-appointed interpreters as the presiding judge asked the lawyers for civil plaintiffs at the trial to identify themselves. An Adopted Name Mr. Barbie's only testimony came when the presiding judge, Andre Cerdini, asked him to state his name. Mr. Barbie identified himself as Klaus Altmann, using the name he adopted after fleeing Europe for South America in 1951. He said he was a businessman and gave La Paz, Bolivia, as his address. When he was asked the name of his father, he answered: ''Niklaus Barbie. I am naturalized since Oct. 3, 1957, in Bolivia under the two names of Klaus Altmann and Klaus Barbie.'' He refused to respond, however, when a lawyer representing some of the civil plaintiffs demanded that he acknowledge that he had identified himself as Klaus Barbie when he was brought back to France in 1983 to face charges. The trial is taking place in a huge reception hall at the Palace of Justice that has been transformed into a courtroom to accommodate the large number of observers and participants, as well as some 700 journalists. Facing the defense table are nearly 40 lawyers representing more than 100 civil plaintiffs, who are individuals claiming to have personally suffered at Mr. Barbie's hands or to have lost many close relatives because of him. Many of the plaintiffs are due to take the stand when testimony in the trial begins, probably next week. The trial is expected to last six to eight weeks. Accused in Deportations Mr. Barbie is specifically accused of responsibility in the deportation of 84 Jews arrested in a raid in February 1943, during a meeting of a Jewish organization here, and of 44 Jewish children living in hiding on a farm in Izieu, a village about 50 miles east of this city. He is also accused of organizing the deportation of 650 people, somewhat more than half of them Jews, on the last convoy to leave Lyons for the detention camps in Eastern Europe in August 1944. Hours before the trial began today, thousands of people gathered at an outdoor Holocaust memorial hastily constructed here in the last few days to serve, according to its planners, as a ''mute presence'' during the trial. The stark cube-shaped memorial, four stories high and covered in white canvas, stands in a central square of Lyons less than a mile from the Palace of Justice. It contains a replica of the central room of Yad Vashem, the Holocaust memorial in Jerusalem. #44 Children Dedicate Memorial The memorial was dedicated this morning by 44 Lyons schoolchildren symbolizing the 44 children from Izieu, all of whom died at Auschwitz in 1944. Most of this city's political leaders, including former Prime Minister Raymond Barre, and Francisque Collomb, the Mayor of Lyons, walked through the memorial, where photographs of the concentration camps and drawings by child inmates of the camp of Theresienstadt in Czechoslovakia are on display. ''It is a mute presence,'' Marek Halter, a writer who is serving as a spokesman of the Lyons Jewish community, said. ''It doesn't need any speeches or commentary.'' ''It is the duty of the state to put criminals on trial so they can be judged,'' he said, ''but it is our duty to do all that we can to insure that these things never be forgotten.'' A Jewish resident of Lyons, Alain Karp, said, ''Barbie himself is not important, but there are an enormous number of people who don't realize the dimensions of what took place during the war.'' Witnesses to Arrests ''My grandfather, my uncles and my aunts were all deported from Lyons, and my uncle was tortured by this man,'' he said, referring to Mr. Barbie. ''There is always incomprehension. You always have to ask, how can such things happen?'' Across the street from the memorial is a restaurant, now called Manhattan Burger, that was, during the war, the Cafe des Beaux-Arts. There, Claude Hodara, a 55-year-old resident of Lyons who came to the memorial this morning, said he witnessed the arrest by Mr. Barbie of his father and other Jews. ''You have to remember that 7,000 out of 11,000 Jews in Lyons at that time were deported,'' Mr. Hodara said, adding that he and other members of his family were saved by non-Jewish people in Lyons who hid them from the Gestapo. One street away from the memorial is the Rue Sainte-Catherine, a narrow alley where Mr. Barbie, commanding a Gestapo group, is believed to have arrested 84 Jews, some 75 of whom later died at Auschwitz. Memories of the Gestapo Near there and within view of the memorial, several Lyonnais, all of them old enough to remember the German occupation of their city, waited for the bus. One woman said that she did not know very much of what happened during the war and that she had never heard of Mr. Barbie before he was brought here four years ago. But several others said that Mr. Barbie had been well known and widely feared during the war. ''I saw with my own eyes when the Gestapo lined people up and shot them,'' one woman said. ''They made them turn their backs and put their hands against the wall. They were Jews and resisters. Everybody knew about that.'' A man, a 70-year-old retiree who gave his name as Jean-Philippe, said that he would eventually visit the Holocaust memorial. ''Oh yes, I'll go to see it,'' he said, ''but it will bring back unpleasant memories.''"
