"President Reagan must make certain that his forthcoming meeting in Reykjavik, Iceland, with Mikhail S. Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, does not become a one-issue trap. There are growing expectations that the meeting will accelerate momentum for an arms control agreement, perhaps as early as next spring. Let's hope we can get a good agreement that soon. But let's also keep in mind that this is an exploratory session and that there are other concerns - not least human rights -that deserve equal weight. The Soviet Union will be cranking out plenty of ''ban the bomb'' rhetoric as a smokescreen to obscure its terrible human rights record and reckless adventurism around the world. Even conceding the overriding importance of arms control, the United States cannot stand still for this tactic. Nicholas Daniloff has his freedom again, but this is not so for countless Soviet citizens. It is not so for the Soviet Jews who ask for the freedom to practice their religion without harrassment. It is not so for the Soviet Jews who, if given the chance, would emigrate, nor for the men and women who ask only to be reunited in another country with their spouses. If I were sitting down with Mr. Gorbachev, I know what I would have at the top of my agenda. I would have the names of Andrei S. Sakharov, Yelena Bonner, Ida Nudel and Alexander Yakir. I would include separated spouses Galina Michelson, Sonia Melnikova and Svetlana Braun, who wish to be reunited with their loved ones. I would include Naum Meiman, who wants to take his wife, Inna, to the West to be treated for cancer. I would have all the Soviet Jews, all the dissidents, all the divided families on a list, a list of men and women seeking their basic human rights - the rights everyone deserves. Nor should we fail to raise Afghanistan, Cambodia, Soviet meddling in this hemisphere and a host of other serious challenges. And I also hope we can press the Soviet side to show more active cooperation with us on terrorism. Finally, we must do everything we can to send the President to Iceland with the strongest hand to play. Unfortunately, some mischief-makers in the House have loaded up the omnibus appropriations bill with a package of arms control demands that can only limit the President's flexibility in Iceland. House leaders have now indicated that they might be willing to postpone a confrontation with the Senate and the President. Let's hope that's the case. Mixed signals from Washington cannot help the President in Iceland. Reykjavik is a major opportunity for progress toward a more secure America and a more safe and humane world. But we will see that promise achieved only if we - the President, the Congress and all Americans - stand together."
