"The Spanish Guardia Civil, or Civil Guard, is a paramilitary national police force that became one of the principal instruments of repression under the Franco regime. The organization, led mainly by Francoist holdovers, has been visible in recent years largely in the northern Basque region, where it and the army have been fighting to suppress the terrorist excesses of Basque nationalism and separatism. That fight is continuing even with the current move toward Basque autonomy and a lessening of popular sympathies for the extremists. It has left many Civil Guard commanders and members embittered and dissatisfied with the new democratic Government in Madrid. This was because the Civil Guard and the army were prime targets for a small band of bomb-throwers and assassins belonging to the separatist group known by the acronym E.T.A., standing for the Basque words meaning Basque Homeland and Freedom. While the Civil Guards in the rest of Spain turned to regular police duties, those stationed in the Basque region continued to be associated with brutality, and there have been recurrent charges of torture used by them in the struggle with the terrorists. Violence Fed on Violence As violence fed on violence, an ever-lengthening roster of military and Guard members of all ranks fell victim to terrorists. In one of the worst incidents, just a year ago, six Civil Guardsmen were killed in an ambush near Bilbao, presumably by E.T.A. terrorists. Under the circumstances, ranking officers of the 65,000-man Civil Guard allied themselves closely with those commanders of the regular army who chafed under the restraints imposed on them by the civilian Government in Madrid. Some of them became involved in Quixotic plots, including Lieut. Col. Antonio Tejero Molina, the man who made captives of the national legislators yesterday at gunpoint with about 200 Civil Guards to back him up. Colonel Tejero was tried last May on charges that he and an artillery captain conspired in 1968 to overthrow the Government by a plan to take the Prime Minister, Adolfo Suarez, and his Cabinet hostage. This, the prosecutor asserted, was to be accomplished by having a special police force storm the palace at Moncloa and keep Mr. Suarez and his ministers captive until King Juan Carlos would agree to a new government dictated by the rebels. After a trial held in tight security in the Madrid military headquarters, Colonel Tejero and his co-defendant received sevenmonth sentences. The Civil Guard, possessed of an austere esprit de corps, is commanded by Maj. Gen. Jose Aramburu Topete of the army. Its tasks include frontier patrols and the prevention of smuggling, as well as highway police functions and helping motorists in distress."
