"The defense in the Klaus Barbie trial presented six witnesses today to dispute the case against him and compare the former Gestapo chief's actions to those carried out in France's colonial wars. Among the witnesses were a historian who cast doubt on the authenticity of a key document in the case, a French former SS officer who disputed the prosecution's version of Mr. Barbie's function in the Gestapo, and several witnesses who said Mr. Barbie's actions, for which he has been charged with crimes against humanity, were no worse than those committed by France in the Algerian war of 1958-62. The witnesses were the only ones called by the defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, after four weeks of testimony by more than 80 witnesses for the prosecution. The more than 40 lawyers involved in the case are expected to begin their summations on Wednesday. Today's testimony had been keenly anticipated, largely because Mr. Verges had warned before the trial that he had several bombshells that would prove deeply embarrassing for France. But the testimony today was less sensational than expected, and the witnesses were challenged on several points under cross-examination. At the start of today's session, the Government prosecutor, Pierre Truche, warned that Mr. Verges aimed to conduct a ''defense of diversion,'' apparently a reference to earlier statements by Mr. Verges that he would raise French crimes against humanity in Algeria and would try to tarnish the reputation of the French Resistance. Mr. Verges's questioning of one witness, a 50-year-old man named Eddine Lakdar-Toumi, was aimed at proving that France has been inconsistent in applying the laws regarding crimes against humanity. Mr. Verges said Mr. Lakdar-Toumi's father was killed after being arrested by French Army officers during the Algerian war. Yet a suit the man brought last year charging France with crimes against humanity in his father's death was dismissed, Mr. Verges said, on the grounds that amnesty had been granted in 1962 for Algerian war crimes. Mr. Verges has argued in court that if charges of crimes against humanity committed in Algeria can be dismissed, so should similar charges against Mr. Barbie. This argument was countered by a lawyer for civil plaintiffs in the case who said Mr. Lakdar-Toumi's suit had been dismissed not because of the amnesty but because it was unclear whether his father had been killed by French forces or by rebel groups who suspected him of having betrayed secrets. Two other witnesses, Paul Guiochon and Jacques Fastre, next took the stand and said French crimes in Algeria were the same as those committed by the Nazis. Another witness, Yves Damion, 63, said that as a 17-year-old he had become a member of the SS. Mr. Damion said that Mr. Barbie, as the second-in-command of German security forces in Lyons, could not have been responsible for the actions here, and that the responsibility would have rested only with his superior, the SS chief in Lyons. Mr. Barbie has maintained that he was only following orders. Mr. Damion also said that an officer who signed a report on a Gestapo operation was not necessarily the person who had carried it out - apparently an attempt to discredit earlier testimony that Mr. Barbie's signature on reports of Gestapo actions showed Mr. Barbie's direct responsibility. The last witness was Jacques Forment Delauney, a historian who said he published in 1974 a photocopy of a Gestapo telex reporting on the arrest and deportation to death camps of 44 Jewish children in Izieu, a central issue of the trial. Mr. Verges said the copy published by Mr. Forment Delauney was not signed by Mr. Barbie, as was the version of the same telex produced in court by the prosecution and used to show Mr. Barbie's responsibility in the children's deportation. Mr. Forment Delauney said under cross-examination that did not know that photocopies of the telex, with Mr. Barbie's signature, had been in three separate archives since 1946."
