"IF they had occurred in the United States, measures taken by the Government in recent weeks to deal with violence and terrorism in Northern Ireland and revise the Official Secrets Act would have provoked a major confrontation with the Supreme Court or required a constitutional convention. But there is no such threat on the horizon for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, whose Government has had a parliamentary majority of about 100 seats since the 1987 election. Under the unwritten British constitution, there is virtually no limit on what a government with a strong majority in Parliament can do. Some opponents of Mrs. Thatcher and even a few members of her Conservative Party think there ought to be, and have been calling for written constitutional limits on the power of government - something that the British, over the centuries, were less concerned about than the power of the monarchy, which the unwritten rules limit strictly. ''It's impossible to conceive of Ronald Reagan unilaterally abolishing the Fifth Amendment,'' said Geoffrey Robertson, a lawyer who is among the few hundred Britons who have signed a petition asking for a written constitution and had it presented to Parliament late last month. A British government with a parliamentary majority can take such action here, Mr. Robertson said, adding. ''You can't trust governments, be they Labor or Tory or Liberal, with civil rights -that's the point.'' In Britain, no Fifth Amendment protects a defendant from being compelled ''to be a witness against himself.'' So earlier in the fall, the Thatcher Government could simply decree that in Northern Ireland, the courts may take a negative view of any defendant who chooses not to cooperate with the police or take the stand in his own defense, not just in terrorism cases but in all criminal trials. Next year, the same provision may be extended to courts in England and Wales (Scotland has a separate legal system). There is no Sixth Amendment guaranteeing the right to ''a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury.'' British judges in Northern Ireland have been trying people accused of terrorist crimes without juries since the early 1970's, and the British police have been able to detain such suspects for up to a week before arraignment. Late last month, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the provision allowing for the detainment of people up to seven days was in violation of the European Convention on Human Rights, to which Britain is a signatory, and the Government said it will try to amend the law to conform to the ruling. No First Amendment prohibits Parliament from ''abridging the freedom of speech or of the press.'' The Thatcher Government has prohibited taped or broadcast interviews not only with members of the I.R.A. and other banned terrorist groups, but also with Sinn Fein, which supports the I.R.A., from the British airwaves. And on Nov. 30 it introduced legislation revising the Official Secrets Act of 1911, forbidding any present or former member of the British security or intelligence services to disclose anything at all about them without authorization. Threats and Secrets Under the proposed legislation, prior publication would not be a defense, so books like Peter Wright's ''Spycatcher,'' published around the world before Britain's highest tribunal recently ruled it could be published here, might have to be withdrawn from the shelves again if the measure becomes law. Mrs. Thatcher's majority and the system of parliamentary discipline penalizing rebels who vote against the Government virtually insure that it will be enacted next year. There is wide tolerance here for the idea that an extraordinary internal threat like terrorism calls for extraordinary measures, and that any government has a right to protect its secrets. But to guard against what some people see as injurious overreaction, the petititon drive was organized by New Statesman and Society, a magazine that leans toward the opposition Labor Party. The preponderance of actors, actresses, and writers among the signatories did little to strengthen its credibility among Mrs. Thatcher's supporters, even those who are critical of the Government's curbs, but even some of those in her own ranks support alternative ways of safeguarding civil liberties. Richard Shepherd, a critical Conservative backbencher, said: ''I'm very much for the European Convention on Human Rights being brought into our law. We signed the convention in 1950, but the argument against putting its provisions into our law has always been that we don't need it.'' He added, ''What I'm wary of is that our courts have lost their feel for being a check on government actions, and that there really aren't any others.'' Similar proposals to bring the European convention on civil rights into British law have been advanced in the past by other distinguished figures, including Lord Hailsham, a former Lord Chancellor (the country's senior judge). Trying a more radical step, the organizers of Charter 88, as the movement for a written constitution is called, acknowledged that Mrs. Thatcher's party has not been alone in treating basic civil rights in cavalier fashion. The original Official Secrets Act, which forbade not only secret agents but all government employees to make any unauthorized disclosures about anything, was passed without much debate under the Liberal Government of Herbert H. Asquith during a war scare in 1911. The Prevention of Terrorism (Emergency Provisions) Act was first introduced in the 1970's under the Labor Governments of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan. Mrs. Thatcher's attitude toward the charter project is reported to be one of complete disdain. ''I think there'll be massive public indifference and ridicule to the whole thing,'' said one Thatcher adviser. He may be right. Many Britons who think about constitutional issues at all view their own flexible, unwritten system as being more up-to-date than the American Constitution, written in the 18th century to guard against dangers they feel no longer exist. And, as one distinguished jurist said this week, ''It is a bloody free country indeed.''"
