"Communist, Western and neutral delegations to the deadlocked Madrid Conference on European Security and Human Rights agreed today to recess until autumn after a session on Friday. An understanding was struck this morning after the United States and its allies refused to accept a further working agenda to underscore their contention that the military repression in Poland had made negotiations here impossible now. Representatives of the 35 signers of the 1975 Helsinki accords have been meeting in Madrid for 16 months to try to broaden the provisions on human freedoms, economic exchanges and the peaceful resolution of international disputes. From the beginning, the efforts have been hindered by the international political climate created by the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and its confinement of dissidents and by the Western attacks on these actions, which have been portrayed as flagrant violations of the 1975 charter. The conference has also been hindered by East-West differences over the mandate for a proposed post-Madrid conference on military security. The declaration of martial law in Poland on Dec. 13 worsened the situation, particularly after Western foreign ministers came here a month ago to castigate Moscow and the Polish military Government. Agreement on Agenda Withheld The Soviet Union responded at first by using procedural maneuvers to block Western speakers, then by maintaining that only Warsaw Pact nations were interested in businesslike negotiations here. But after NATO nations refused to participate in drafting sessions, it became evident that the Madrid meeting would have to be adjourned. On Friday, emphasizing their impatience with the situation, the NATO nations withheld agreement to an agenda for this week's sessions. Since the Helsinki ground rules require consensus among all 35 participants, the Friday session continued until 4 A.M. Saturday, when it took a diplomatic ''coffee break'' until this morning. Over the weekend, an informal group including Austria, the Soviet Union and the United States sought a way out of the impasse and finally succeeded this morning. The West agreed to one more week of talks in Madrid, while the Soviet Union agreed to an Austrian proposal that the last session be Friday. Return on Nov. 9 Expected Although the date for reconvening will not be fixed until Friday, it seems likely that all sides will agree on Nov. 9. Some diplomats hope that during this ''cooling-off period,'' as one called it, the international climate will have improved enough to make further negotiations here conceivable. Others suspect that the current deadlock will recur. One of the peculiarities of the Helsinki accords is that they call for periodic review sessions. The first took place October 1977 to March 1978 in Belgrade and was marked by sharp rhetoric and a terse final statement that amounted to an agreement to disagree. The Madrid conference has run far longer and at times been far stormier, but its cumbersome consensus ground rules have prevented it from breaking up, particularly as neither East nor West wants to be blamed for such an event. ''We seem to be creating the Helsinki forum as a permanent institution,'' observed the head of one West European delegation who has taken special delight in accusing the Soviet Union of transgressions of the Final Act. ''I think we have to decide whether or not this is a good thing. Maybe it is a good thing.''"
