"In reaction to this week's unsuccessful military coup, the @''political-military'' branch of the Basque separatist organization E.T.A. declared an ''unconditional cease-fire'' today in the northern region and freed three honorary consuls that it had held captive for eight days. At a clandestine news conference in southern France, held to announce a major shift in strategy, hooded Basque leaders of the political-military branch called upon the hard-line ''military'' wing of the terrorist organization to halt its campaign of killing policemen and members of the Civil Guard. The move by the political-military branch of the divided Marxist-Leninist organization was potentially of considerable importance for the future of Spain, because unchecked Basque terrorism impelled senior military officers to attempt the coup. With the country still shaken by the unsuccessful putsch, King Juan Carlos I called upon the armed forces and the nation's politicians today to bury their differences. He condemned the mutinous officers for believing that they were ''the saviors of the fatherland and that salvation of the fatherland lies through subversion and violence.'' King at Ceremonies in the North In full military uniform, flanked by Queen Sofia and their three children, the 43-year-old King presided over the solemn ceremonies at Zaragoza marking the 25th anniversary of his graduation from the nation's military academy in the northern city. ''Recent events, which are in the minds of everyone,'' the King said, ''should serve as a lesson to both the armed forces and the Government and the opposition to rectify their behavior so as to achieve order, security and the good of Spain.'' The King also urged the press, radio and television to avoid reporting that could arouse the sensibilities of the army and the police, noting that they have long been a target of terrorists. Juan Carlos, who halted the coup by rallying senior officers, has warned politicians against wholesale indictments of the military that could be counterproductive. The three honorary consuls held by E.T.A. - Hermann Diez del Sel Korsatko of Austria, Antonio Amparo Fernandez of El Salvador and Gabriel de Biurrun of Uruguay - were released unharmed at midday in San Sebastian. They said that they had been kept in a small country house in a single room but had been well treated. Captors' Demands Were Not Met Their captors had demanded, as a price for their freedom, that national newspapers publish a report by Amnesty International asserting that torture continues in Spain and that the state-run television transmit color photographs of the body of Jose Ignacio Arregui, an E.T.A. militant who died in police custody this month after being tortured. The demands, which were not met, inflamed the police and conservative sectors of the military. On Feb. 17, after five policemen were arrested in connection with the Arregui affair, the country's senior police officials angrily submitted their resignations. Today the Interior Ministry announced that it had accepted the resignations of Manuel Ballesteros, an antiterrorist expert and chief of police intelligence, Jose Luis Fernandez Dopico, secretary general of the police, and Miguel Fernandez Robles, the commissioner general in charge of intelligence. The three men had made their careers under the Franco regime. The decision by the members of the political-military branch to lay down their arms further widens a split within E.T.A. that has sharpened notably this year, particularly after the intransigent ''military'' wing killed a Basque nuclear engineer. The politicalmilitary branch labeled the killing ''fascist.'' 'Evils of Militarism' In a communique distributed this evening, the political-military branch, which accepts the Basque region's autonomy statute, said that a continued ''armed struggle'' would ''multiply the evils of militarism'' and isolate E.T.A. in the Basque region. ''E.T.A.  political-military imposes no conditions on the political parties,'' the communique continued, ''but it will reconsider the cease-fire if there is a successful coup d'etat.'' E.T.A. takes its initials from the Basque words for Basque Land and Liberty."
