"Until recently, students at the Brynteg Comprehensive School who were insolent or persistently truant were struck on the palms of their hands with a bamboo cane: once for a first offense but never more than three times for something serious. Mike Clubb, the senior deputy headmaster, said that over the years he had probably caned 300 students. ''It was part of the job,'' he said, ''like ordering the furniture.'' The drawback, he said, was that ''it was ineffective'' because he found himself punishing the same students over and over. A year ago the school, where the students range in age from 11 to 19, quietly ended the practice. Brynteg is in Mid Glamorgan County, once tabbed the caning capital of Britain by opponents of corporal punishment. After an incident last year in which a defiant boy stamped on a violin in front of his headmaster, Philip Squire, the chairman of the county's education committee, said, ''Sending a teacher into a classroom with no cane is like sending a boxer into the ring with one hand tied behind his back.'' A national poll conducted in February by Marketing & Opinion Research International for The Times of London indicated that many parents might agree with him. Of 604 parents questioned, 63 percent were in favor of corporal punishment in schools: 67 percent had themselves received such punishment. Britain is the only nation in Western Europe that permits children to be hit with a cane, strap, slipper or hand at school. Since 1982, it has been under orders from the European Court of Human Rights to allow parents to prevent this from happening. This year, the Government proposed a bill that would meet the mandate of the court and no more: parents would be given the opportunity to say whether or not their child should be subject to corporal punishment. The children of those who said yes could be caned; the children of those who said no could not. Teachers and school administrators complained that such a ''two tier'' system, of ''beatable'' and ''unbeatable'' pupils, would be unfair and unworkable, but the proposed bill passed the House of Commons by a narrow margin. Early in July, however, it went down to defeat in the House of Lords, which voted, 108 to 104, that corporal punishment should be abolished. On July 23, the Education Secretary, Sir Keith Joseph, paying tribute ''to the wisdom of the House of Lords,'' announced that the Government would drop its bill and start again in the next session of Parliament. Meanwhile, each school may decide whether or not to use the cane. Three years ago, the Church of England's Board of Education advised its members to phase out corporal punishment, and the Roman Catholic Church, which educates 10 percent of the children in Britain, has recommended the same thing. Tom Scott, education secretary of the Society of Teachers Opposed to Physical Punishment, keeps a long catalog of complaints about children who are caned in school. His references to ''beatings'' enrage school officials, who call his language too emotional. ''In Europe,'' Mr. Scott said, ''the British have the reputation for not treating children very well. We place a higher priority on animals than on children. If we inflicted on animals the kind of brutality meted out to children, there would be an outcry.'' He added: ''A lot of parents smack kids themselves, and they think it's done the same way in the schools. There's all the difference in the world between a slap by the parent in a loving relationship and a cold-blooded beating by a teacher.'' Recent studies of British children have shown more disruptive and violent behavior by children in younger age groups, some as young as four and five. While teachers blame television and a lack of parental interest, parents often see the schools as the last place to draw the line for discipline. At Brynteg, Mr. Clubb said, ''I have parents who come in and say, 'I beat him, why don't you beat him?' ''"
