"Pope John Paul II, commemorating those who died on the battlefields of Flanders, warned today against ''unilateral slogans'' and ''simple sentimentalism'' in the pursuit of peace. John Paul chose this town, surrounded by 170 war cemeteries, to call for peace while vigorously endorsing the right of nations to protect themselves. The Pope's statement represented one of his clearest defenses of Roman Catholicism's traditional ''just war'' teaching, which holds that the use of force can sometimes be justified. The address implicitly criticized a pacifist current in the church in recent years. 'Deep Furrows' of War The Pope underlined the importance of his message by choosing a town that is a powerful symbol of suffering and violence. Ypres was destroyed by shelling in several waves of fighting in World War I. The combat took 500,000 lives, and the Pope said today that this region was a place ''where war has plowed its deep furrows for centuries.'' ''These graves surrounding us keep on speaking to us of the vulnerability of the human society,'' the Pope told a crowd of thousands gathered in the town's Gothic main square, rebuilt after the war. ''Those who possess a sense of reality and a love for the true freedom and dignity of individuals and of nations,'' the Pope went on, ''are thus convinced of the legitimacy of the right to defend oneself against an unjust aggressor.'' ''Peace is no longer a question that can be dealt with rhetorically, by merely using easy and unilateral slogans,'' the Pope said at another point. ''Deep convictions and a total commitment are necessary; a simple sentimentalism does not suffice.'' Respect for Human Rights John Paul argued that the fundamental cause of war was a failure to respect human rights. ''War and violence originate when one does not recognize the fundamental rights of men,'' the Pope said. ''Violence which destroys homes and buildings is serious, but violence directed against the dignity of the individual is intolerable and unworthy of man.'' John Paul argued that those who would be peacemakers should understand the difficulties of reconciling the goals and values of diverse groups. ''A determined will for peace,'' he said, ''must go hand in hand with clear insights, and this task is not always easy when confronted with so many diverging interests. ''Involvement in the cause of peace,'' he continued, ''must be accompanied by a clear understanding of the principles and values at stake. As the threat that hangs over humanity becomes greater, the moral maturity of mankind must grow stronger.'' Prayer at War Memorial He made his address after saying a prayer at the Menin Gate, a memorial to 54,896 soldiers of the British Empire who were reported missing in the battles around Ypres between 1914 and August 1917. John Paul was applauded as he arrived at the arch. He stood somberly as a men's choir sang a hymn to the dead, and he then ascended stairs through a side arch and knelt and prayed silently before a wreath and a cross. Both were fashioned from artificial red and black poppies, a symbol of remembrance for the war dead and the motif in John McCrae's war poem, ''In Flanders Fields.'' With about 100 soldiers and some disabled veterans looking on, the Pope descended the stairs and stood again beneath the high point of the arch, almost at attention, while six buglers sounded the sober, mournful call of ''The Last Post.'' John Paul's address on war and peace concerned an issue that has divided Catholics throughout the world. In the United States, debate on the issue reached a high point in May 1983, when the American bishops issued a pastoral letter that questioned the morality of nuclear deterrence. The letter caused enormous debate, and the Pope is believed to have encouraged the American bishops to tone down particularly vigorous criticism of deterrence in an earlier draft. The French and West German bishops issued letters more sympathetic to deterrence and particularly sharp in their discussion of the Soviet Union. A Call for Justice and Peace Despite his skepticism about absolute pacifism, the Pope has repeatedly condemned the arms race. Today, he warned that ''if we remain silent, the clamor of violence will stifle the cry of the people, who call for justice and peace.'' ''If we remain silent,'' the Pope went on, ''the arms race will continue to absorb funds, energy and creativity. Thus little money and attention will be left for nourishment, health, development and lodging, especially in the poorest countries.'' He also said that although nations have a right to defend themselves, they must never subordinate the pursuit of peace to the goal of security. ''This is the message left to us by all victims of war,'' the Pope said. ''Peace is necessary; it is therefore the duty of every one of us. This task of building freedom and security should never be separated from a broader task: the building of peace.'' ----#100,000 at Mass in Ghent GHENT, Belgium, May 17 - Pope John Paul II traveled this afternoon from Ypres to Ghent, where he celebrated mass before about 100,000 people. He praised ''the simple faith of the people in these regions,'' which he said ''has contributed no less than the intellectual efforts to the vitality of the Christian tradition.''"
