"A court in Strasbourg, France, ruled today that a British law permitting pre-arraignment detention for up to a week of people suspected of connections with terrorist groups was a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights. The ruling, by the European Court of Human Rights, means that Britain will have to change its law, or seek special exemption within six months, according to British lawyers familiar with the case. The Home Office, which only last Friday asked Parliament to put the Prevention of Terrorism law on a permanent footing, said it would consider the court decision before the House of Commons takes up the new bill. Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher reacted angrily to the court ruling and to the failure of the Belgian and Irish Governments to extradite an Irish Roman Catholic priest, the Rev. Patrick Ryan, who is wanted by the British on charges of helping the outlawed Irish Republican Army. She told the Commons, ''We shall consider the judgment carefully and also the human rights of the victims and potential victims of terrorism.'' Father Ryan had been on a hunger strike for 22 days in Belgium until Friday, when the authorities decided not to extradite him to Britain and flew him to Dublin instead. The British Government transmitted a new extradition request, but the priest checked out of a hospital for an undisclosed location Monday. The Irish authorities say they know where he is. Mrs. Thatcher will meet with the leaders of Belgium and Ireland at a winter summit meeting of the 12-member European Community on the Aegean island of Rhodes at week's end. The court's judgment, came as the New Statesman society presented to Parliament a petition for a written British Constitution, signed by more than 200 public figures in the arts, education, entertainment and the law. Geoffrey Robertson, a lawyer who signed the petition, said that the Government could decide that fundamental rights to a speedy trial or to remain silent could ''be snuffed out just like that,'' since there is no written British constitution. The case considered by the human rights court involved four men from Northern Ireland who were arrested in 1984 and held for periods ranging from four days to nearly seven, but never charged with any crime. The four complainants, Terence Brogan, Dermot Coyle, William McFadden and Michael Tracey, appealed to the European Commission of Human Rights after their release, and it referred the case to the court, which has 19 members. The justices ruled, 12 to 7, that all four defendants had been denied their right to be brought ''promptly'' before a judge or other judicial officer after their arrests, and, 13 to 6, that they had also been denied ''an enforceable right to compensation,'' as provided by clauses of the European Convention, signed by Britain in 1950. The court did not say what it thought ''prompt'' arraignment actually meant - only that four days did not meet the test. The British anti-terrorist law now in force gives the police 48 hours, but says that in special cases, the Home Secretary can extend that period by a maximum of five more days. The British Government is obliged to observe the terms of decisions by the European Court of Human Rights as part of its obligations as a signatory to the European Convention. It can, according to international lawyers here, ask for a waiver in special cases but Mrs. Thatcher's statement today indicated that Britain would probably abide by the decision. Britain has been found in violation of the treaty in 21 other cases, and has always abided by the court's rulings. After a rash of terrorist bombings in Northern Ireland last summer, the British Government decreed that judges trying criminal cases there may draw negative conclusions from the silence of a defendant who refused to talk to the police or testify in court. By executive decree, the British authorities also banned radio and television from broadcasting live or recorded interviews with members of terrorist organizations or groups that support them."
