"Representat ives of the 35 countries who in 1975 signed the Helsinki Final Act will meet in Madrid on Tuesday. The first order of business will be to agree on the purpose of the meeting. Preliminary negotiations have gone on for several months. The issue is: Should there continue to be in-depth public reviews of each signatory country's compliance with its commitments made in Helsinki, particularly in the area of human rights. The answer will determine whether the Act remains an effective instrument of Western foreign policy or becomes merely the final word on post-World War II European borders. President-elect Reagan's victory may encourage the Soviet Union to stall. In January, he could choose to boycott the conference, making good on his campaign statement that ''going to Madrid is negating what we thought we could accomplish by boycotting the Olympics.'' If a review of compliance does not occur until after Jan. 20, the Reagan administration may be less likely to emphasize human rights. The Soviet Union would welcome either result. Madrid will be an early test of the Carter Administration's ''lameduck'' foreign policy. Will the Administration be able to begin the review in Madrid immediately, holding the Soviet Union to its 1977 commitment? Will it be able to sustain a meaningful review?  Success might pivot on Ronald Reagan's willingness to reconsider his earlier opposition. From the Soviet perspective, the Act's primary achievement was its explicit recognition of the integrity of post-World War II European borders. But, the Act was not a one-sided agreement. It contains 25 pages of fine print in which the concept that fundamental standards of human rights and civil liberties are essential to maintain international security is translated into specific principles and commitments. From the Western perspective, the primary value of the Act would pivot on its implementation. Recognizing this, the Act committed the signatory countries to participate in follow-up meetings ''for a thorough exchange of views... on the implementation of the provisions.'' Although the record of implementation has varied country by country, a strong case can be made, as in 1977 at the first followup conference, in Belgrade, that the Soviet record is the most shameful of all the signatories' and that Eastern Europe's is almost as bad. This is a case that Moscow does not want heard again. A simple solution to a Madrid stalemate would be to boycott the conference or to walk out. We could assert that Soviet violations of the Act, including the invasion of Afghanistan, and the long list of human rights violations, are so basic that they have in effect terminated the contract. Any such move would serve Soviet purposes better than the West's. Our position on detente has been stated in other forms and buttressed by policy actions, including the embargo on grain for the Soviet Union and the boycott of the Olympics. It should not be reinforced by destroying a forum as vital as the Helsinki review meetings and erasing from the international record a statement of fundamental values as clear and thorough as the Final Act. The Act can remain an effective instrument of future Western foreign policy if at Madrid a thorough compliance review emphasizing the human rights provisions is undertaken and if another conference for the explicit purpose of such a review is scheduled. Agreement on this review process would reaffirm the basic tenet of the Act that participating nations must be willing to have the international community hold them to account for their actions. The threat of such accounting should be an incentive for adherence to the Act. Two quite different audiences are both counting on America to safeguard the Helsinki process. Compliance review of domestic policies may be a high price to pay but Eastern European leaders take great silent solace in the hope that the Act provides some disincentive to Soviet violations of their territorial integrity. The other audience consists of millions of individuals who see the Act as a standard by which the actions of their governments should be measured and as an international commitment that their governments should honor. Many are now in jail for acting on this conviction.  Their freedom should be demanded in Madrid so that the world can honor their work even if they cannot now be liberated from its consequences. The goals of the Act will be achieved, in the long run, only if all the participants find new reason to have faith in the value of detente. Until then, we should fight to keep the Act alive. --------------------------------------------------------------------- Stephen Fuzesi Jr., an attorney, is a member of the committee on international human rights of the New York City Bar Association and of the Council on Foreign Relations."
