"Klaus Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of this city, was convicted early today of crimes against humanity and was sentenced to life imprisonment. Mr. Barbie, who walked out of the trial on its third day, nearly two months ago, and had returned only twice since then, was brought into the courtroom just after midnight for the reading of the verdict. He stood motionless and without expression, his head bowed slightly toward his court interpreter, as the presiding judge, Andre Cerdini, pronounced him guilty on all 341 separate items of the indictment, involving the deportation, unlawful imprisonment and torture of Jews and members of the French Resistance during the German occupation of Lyons between 1942 and 1944. Barbie Stood for Verdict Mr. Barbie stood for the entire 30 minutes that it took to read the decision, his gaze wandering once or twice. Then, he was led away in handcuffs, to be returned to his prison cell. The life sentence means that Mr. Barbie, 73 years old, will be eligible for parole in 15 years, when he will be 88. France abolished the death penalty in 1981. French courts had convicted Mr. Barbie of war crimes twice in absentia and sentenced him to death, but the statute of limitations in those cases expired before he could be returned to France. Trial Riveted the Country The verdict, after six hours of deliberation by the panel of three judges and nine jurors, ended an eight-week trial, the first in a French court on a charge of crimes against humanity. The proceedings had commanded the attention of this country, first by several weeks of often gripping and dramatic testimony and then by a bitter, often angry contest between prosecution and defense lawyers. ''This shows that the French people have not forgotten,'' Serge Klarsfeld, a lawyer and Nazi crimes researcher, said after the verdict. Mr. Klarsfeld, who led a 10-year campaign to have Mr. Barbie brought to France from a 32-year refuge in South America, said: ''There was an exceptional crime, and this was an exceptional trial. And because memory is related to justice, it means that the children of Izieu will not die away in memory. They will not be forgotten.'' Verdict Is Applauded Mr. Klarsfeld was referring to 44 Jewish children who were taken by the Gestapo from a rural hiding place just east of here and sent to their deaths in the Nazi concentration camps. The verdict was greeted by loud applause and cheers from the gallery, but the crowd was quickly silenced by Mr. Cerdini. Several hundred people had gathered outside the courthouse here Friday evening and had waited for hours for the court's decision. On Friday afternoon, after a final five-hour summation by the chief defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, Mr. Barbie was brought into court to hear a question that is required by French law: ''Do you have anything to say in your defense?'' Mr. Barbie, who refused to answer questions in two earlier appearances, this time said, ''Yes, a few words in French. ''I did not commit the roundup of the children of Izieu. I did not have the power to decide on deportations. I fought a harsh combat against the Resistance, which I respect; but it was war, and now the war is over.'' A 'Historic' Event Mr. Barbie, who came to be known as the Butcher of Lyons, was the chief of the Gestapo here from late 1942 until the Germans were driven from this part of France in August 1944. He was brought to France four years ago from Bolivia, where he had lived under the assumed name Klaus Altmann since escaping from Europe in 1951. His trial, more than 40 years after the German defeat, had been heralded by many here as a historic event and one whose purpose was not only to bring a presumed Nazi criminal to justice, but also to enrich the memory of the wartime persecution of Jews - more than 60,000 of whom died in deportation - and members of the Resistance. Mr. Barbie had been charged with four major crimes, including the seizure of the children of Izieu; the deportation of at least 78 Jews arrested in a Gestapo raid in February 1943; the organization of a train convoy - the last to leave this city - that carried 650 prisoners, including Jews and members of the Resistance, to concentration camps in Germany and Poland; Mr. Barbie also was accused of arresting and deporting 49 other people, including Simone Lagrange, who testified that she was tortured by Mr. Barbie when she was 13 years old in an effort to force her to disclose the hiding place of her brother and sister. Fears About Defense Well before the trial began, it had become a major event in this country, which is still haunted by the deep wounds and humiliations of the Nazi occupation from 1940 to 1944. In the months leading up to the trial, public figures here had expressed fears that the defense lawyer, Mr. Verges, known as a supporter of radical third world causes, would turn the hearings against France itself, whose record of collaboration with the Nazi occupiers is rarely examined. For most of the trial's eight weeks, however, the French wartime record was rarely mentioned. In the last few days, however, the defense tried not only to discredit the case against Mr. Barbie but to use the event as a platform to accuse the West of committing ''colonialist'' crimes. Mr. Verges asserted that the gravity of these crimes equalled that of the Nazis. Charge of Fabricated Evidence Mr. Verges, who rarely intervened during the testimony, used his final pleas to wage an aggressive defense, dismissing the evidence against Mr. Barbie and, in statements apparently designed to stir controversy, denying the unprecedented dimensions of the Nazis' attempted genocide of the Jews. Mr. Verges's major argument was that evidence against Mr. Barbie had been fabricated and that much of the testimony was distorted in what he called a shameful attempt to convict Mr. Barbie. On Friday, Mr. Verges accused Mr. Klarsfeld, the researcher of Nazi crimes who located Mr. Barbie in South America in 1971, of having faked one of the key pieces of evidence in the case - a telex said to have been sent by Mr. Barbie to report to his superiors in Paris on the roundup of the children of Izieu. ''This trial is an immense piece of trickery,'' Mr. Verges said. ''It is an immense mistake.'' Crimes by West Are Cited Speaking of what were called the ''individual cases'' of torture and deportation, Mr. Verges today charged that much of their testimony, including, he said, that of Mrs. Lagrange, represented ''an evolution of phantasms.'' Aside from pointing out what he called discrepancies in their testimony and asserting that they had exaggerated their experiences, Mr. Verges offered virtually no evidence refuting the testimony of Mrs. Lagrange and Mr. Barbie's other reported victims. The tone of the other side of his defense, his attempt to turn the trial into an accusation against colonialism by the West, was suggested several times by Mr. Verges in his remarks Friday. Mr. Verges said, for example, that the ''final solution'' regarding the Jews was not a product of Hitlerian anti-Semitism, but arose rather from the colonialist mentality itself - particularly the German ''will to colonize the Slavs.'' 'A Difficult Truth' ''We have to accept a difficult truth,'' Mr. Verges said. ''That Nazism was not an absolute evil, but only one of its modern manifestations.'' ''The idea that anti-Semitism, old as the world, old as the Roman Empire, could have led to genocide is ridiculous,'' he said. Mr. Barbie was put on trial, Mr. Verges contended, in order to ''expiate'' the sins of the West. ''Let us finish, I beg of you, with this hypocritical pretension,'' Mr. Verges told the court in asking it to find Mr. Barbie not guilty. November 1942:  Klaus Barbie becomes Gestapo head for Lyons and surrounding region. February 1943:  86 Jews are arrested at Lyons office of a French Jewish committee; at least 78 are sent to concentration camps. June 21, 1943:  Jean Moulin, Resistance leader in Lyons, is arrested; he is tortured and dies after interrogation. April 6, 1944:  44 Jewish children and seven adults are deported to Auschwitz from the village of Izieu, 50 miles east of Lyons; one adult survives. August 1944:  The Allies liberate Occupied France. 1946:  Barbie is arrested in Germany by United States forces; he escapes. 1947:  Barbie begins working as an agent in Germany for the United States Army Counterintelligence Corps. December 1947:  Barbie is arrested; he is freed six months later and resumes intelligence work. March 1951:  Sought by the French for war crimes, Barbie travels with family from Genoa, Italy, reportedly with papers supplied by American officials under the name Klaus Altmann. He sails for South America and settles in Bolivia. 1952 and 1954:  Barbie is convicted of war crimes by Lyons military tribunal in absentia and sentenced to death. 1972:  Newspapers report that Barbie is living in Peru under alias. Under pressure from Peruvian authorities, he returns to Bolivia. 1973:  Bolivian Supreme Court denies French extradition request. Feb. 4, 1983:  New civilian Government in Bolivia expels Barbie, putting him on a plane for French Guiana, where he is arrested by the French authorities and flown to Lyons. May 11, 1987:  Barbie goes on trial in Lyons for crimes against humanity. July 4, 1987:  Barbie is convicted and sentenced to life in prison."
