"A former high French Government official will be charged Wednesday with ''crimes against humanity'' in a case that has reopened one of the most sensitive questions in French life: the extent to which occupied France collaborated with the German Nazis in World War II. French officials said today that Maurice Papon, who served as the top budget official under President Valery Giscard d'Estaing from 1978 to 1981, would be accused of carrying out orders to deport Jews to death camps when he served under the German occupation authorities between 1942 and 1944. All inquiries into the conduct of the French under the occupation are inevitably emotional. While the French pride themselves on their resistance against the Germans, many French officials served either under the German authorities or in the Vichy Government, which ruled the initially unoccupied part of France after the defeat in 1940. The Germans occupied all of France after the Allied invasion of North Africa in November 1942. Anti-Semitism a Sensitive Issue Even more difficult, however, are questions involving anti-Semitism, and in recent years France has debated both how far the French went in assisting in the deportation and ultimate death of tens of thousands of French Jews, and how much France today still suffers from anti-Semitism. The matter is already highly political. The accusations against Mr. Papon were first made a few days before the 1981 elections. Mr. Papon charged then that they had been brought as part of the campaign to discredit Mr. Giscard d'Estaing. Jean-Claude Nicod, the chief investigating magistrate in Bordeaux, said Mr. Papon had asked to be charged to gain access to the files on the case. Mr. Nicod said that, under French law, Mr. Papon could see his files only if he was charged, or if he had been the victim of a crime. But the investigator added that, even if Mr. Papon had not made his request, ''the evidence obliged me to charge him.'' The 72-year-old Mr. Papon will be accused in a court in Bordeaux of carrying out orders to deport Jews to death camps when he was secretary general of the prefecture of Gironde during the Nazi occupation of France. In Key Posts After the War After the war, Mr. Papon held important posts, serving as the Prefect of Police in Paris from 1958 to 1966 and ultimately becoming the top budget official under President Giscard d'Estaing. According to Serge Klarsfeld, a lawyer who specializes in hunting down war criminals, Mr. Papon signed documents ordering the deportation of Jewish children who had been placed in foster homes after their parents had been sent to concentration camps. Mr.  Klarsfeld represents a group of six Jewish families seeking to have charges brought against Mr. Papon. In all, 1,690 members of Bordeaux's 16,000-member Jewish community were deported. Only a few of those deported survived.  The allegations against Mr. Papon were first made public by Le Canard Enchaine on the eve of the 1981 elections, in which Mr.  Giscard d'Estaing was defeated by Francois Mitterrand. Mr. Papon could not be reached for comment today. His lawyers, Francois Sarda and Jean Rozier, said through spokesmen that they would not comment on the case. When the allegations were first made, Mr. Papon asked a commission of former French Resistance fighters to investigate them. While serving as an official in occupied France, Mr. Papon was a member of the Resistance from 1943 onward and used his post to give information to those fighting the Germans. In December 1981, the inquiry commission unanimously agreed that even though Mr. Papon had taken ''courageous initiatives'' against German orders - some of which might have led to his own deportation - he should have resigned rather than carry out instructions. Although Mr. Papon sometimes tried to ''attenuate'' the persecution of Jews, the commission said, he ''executed orders under discriminatory and criminal measures of which Jews were the victims.'' The law involving ''crimes against humanity'' under which Mr. Papon is being charged was passed in 1964 and is based on the legal principles of the Nuremberg war crimes tribunal, which heard cases immediately after World War II."
