"A senior official in the West German Justice Ministry testified today that documents used by the prosecution in the trial of Klaus Barbie, the wartime Gestapo chief of Lyons, are authentic. The official, Alfred Streim, told the court that the documents showed direct responsibility by Mr. Barbie in two mass deportations of Jews from Lyons to eventual death in Nazi camps. Mr. Barbie is charged with crimes against humanity. During the months leading up to the trial, Mr. Barbie's defense lawyer, Jacques Verges, had said in interviews that the documents, seen as key pieces of prosecution evidence, were fake. The documents consist of telexes or reports, signed by Mr. Barbie, in which he appears to inform the central office of the Gestapo in Paris of two operations against Jews in Lyons. 'They Are Authentic' One is a document reporting the deportation, in February 1943, of 84 Jews, most of them women, children or elderly people, seized in a raid on a Jewish organization. The other is a telex announcing the seizure on April 6, 1944, of 44 Jewish children from the village of Izieu, east of here. All 44 children were killed at Auschwitz. ''I have studied the documents and I can say that they are authentic,'' Mr. Streim said. He told the court that he was the chief of the German Justice Ministry's department that investigates Nazi crimes, and had studied numerous documents on the German occupation of France. During pre-trial interrogations, Mr. Barbie, maintained that while he was head of the Gestapo in Lyons he did not concern himself with actions against Jews. Those, he asserted, were carried out by what he described as an autonomous subsection of the Gestapo. Mr. Streim said notations on the reports showed that the operations in question were initiated by the Gestapo in Lyons, a point apparently designed to refute a possible claim by the defense that Gestapo officials here were merely obeying orders of superiors. Earlier in today's session, the sixth in the trial, lawyers for civil plaintiffs in the case demanded that the presiding judge use force to compel Mr. Barbie, who withdrew from the trial last Wednesday, to appear in court. The request was denied on the ground that most of the witnesses had a chance to confront Mr. Barbie in pre-trial questioning."
