"Former Gov. Hugh L. Carey said yesterday that he would not march in this year's St. Patrick's Day Parade because a supporter of the outlawed Irish Republican Army had been selected to lead it. ''I will miss the parade as a marcher,'' Mr. Carey said in a telephone interview. ''I don't think the parade should be led by anyone sympathetic to an organization that stands for terrorism.'' This month, Michael Flannery, an 81-year-old retired insurance supervisor from Queens, was elected grand marshal of the parade by the Ancient Order of Hibernians, a Roman Catholic lay association that has traditionally been in charge of the annual March 17 event.  Mr. Flannery, an outspoken supporter of the I.R.A., has said the event would be a demonstration of support for the I.R.A. A statement issued yesterday by Terrence Cardinal Cooke said, ''The one course of action which we cannot follow is to support - in any way, even by signs and symbols - the continuation of senseless, indiscriminate violence as a means to achieve political effects.'' Cardinal Urges Celebration The statement, which follows one issued Feb. 9, did not say whether the Cardinal would review the parade from the steps of St. Patrick's Cathedral on Fifth Avenue, as he has previously. The statement yesterday indicated that a decision might be made later. ''Very soon, I hope to make a statement about the local issues which face us as we prepare for what should be the religious and cultural celebration of St. Patrick's Day,'' Cardinal Cooke wrote. A spokesman for the Archdiocese said the Cardinal's participation was ''still under consideration.'' ''The Cardinal hasn't revealed his thoughts on what he's going to do to anyone,'' the spokesman, Joseph Zwilling, said. ''I would think that this is a particularly difficult decision. It's obviously a very sensitive issue, and the Cardinal is getting quite a bit of input from people on both sides of the debate.'' Cardinal Cooke's statement yesterday said, ''Many of us who are Irish or of Irish descent have strong convictions and deep emotions about the situation in Ireland - specifically about the oppression, the injustice, the denial of human rights and equal opportunity which have existed in that nation for centuries and which tragically still exist in the North of Ireland.'' Withdrawal by Moynihan ''Indiscriminate violence,'' he said, ''no matter what motivates it or to what goal it is directed, is both futile and immoral.'' Mr. Carey, who was grand marshal of the parade in 1956, is the second prominent politician to announce he would not participate in the parade. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a Democrat, said earlier this month that he would not take part if Mr. Flannery was the grand marshal. Other figures, including Mayor Koch, Governor Cuomo and Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican, said that they would march but that their participation was not intended to endorse or condone the I.R.A. Noting the I.R.A. has been oulawed in Ireland and Northern Ireland, Mr. Carey said, ''The parade should not be used to condone or lend sympathy to an outlawed organization.'' Aid From Organizations Mr. Carey said he hoped the parade committee would reconsider its choice of Mr. Flannery as grand marshal. Failing that, he suggested the Roman Catholic Church could withhold its support from the parade. ''The parade succeeds only to the extent that organizations march in that parade,'' Mr. Carey said. ''Many of these organizations are church related, principally the Roman Catholic Church.'' He said church organizations were responsible for the attendance of many students at the parade.  ''Should schoolchildren be encouraged to march when the parade is conducted by those who are sympathetic to a form of terrorism?'' Mr. Carey asked. ''That's a very difficult question for those who conduct the schools.''"
