"Guerrillas of the outlawed Irish Republican Army said today that they were responsible for killing an 86-year-old Protestant politician and his son last night and burning their ancestral home with fire bombs. In a statement issued by the Republican News Bureau in Dublin, the Provisionals of the predominantly Roman Catholic I.R.A. said the attack on Sir Norman Stronge, a former Speaker of the Northern Ireland Parliament, and his 48-year-old son James was a reprisal for a series of ''assassinations and murder attacks on nationalist people.'' The statement called both men ''symbols of hated unionism,'' that is of maintaining the union of Northern Ireland with Britain. The police said they believed the attack was in specific reprisal for the attempted assassination by Protestants on Friday of the Catholic civil rights activist Bernadette Devlin McAliskey and her husband, Michael. Protestant militants immediately called for retaliation for the killing of Sir Norman and James Stronge. Protestants Urged to Fight The Protestant militant group, the Ulster Defense Association, urged the British-ruled province's one million Protestants to fight back against ''this conspiracy to destroy our homeland.'' James Molyneaux, leader of the Ulster Unionists party, said the killings were ''a further act of genocide'' by the I.R.A. in the British-ruled province, where Protestants outnumber Catholics by 2 to 1. The police said the explosions of the fire bombs last night drew them to Tynan Abbey, the 230-year-old home of the Stronges near the border with the Irish Republic. They exchanged gunfire with at least eight assailants outside the burning mansion, they said, but the intruders escaped in two cars. Assistant Chief Constable Trevor Forbes said the attack, carried out by ''Mafia gang-type terrorists,'' could ''well be in retaliation for the shooting at the home of Mrs. McAliskey.'' Policemen, troops and British army helicopters were searching today for the eight terrorists. Mr. Forbes said hundreds of troops on both sides of the border had staked out a 10-mile wooded area where some of the terrorists were believed to be hiding. One of Biggest Operations ''This is one of the biggest cross-border security operations ever mounted,'' he said.  Sir Norman, a leader of the Protestant majority, was Speaker of the Northern Ireland Parliament from 1945 to 1969, when he gave up his seat because of his age and was succeeded by his son. Britain dissolved the Protestant-dominated Parliament in 1972 after four years of violence between Protestants and Catholics. The British now govern the six northern Irish provinces from London. The two latest killings raised the toll from nearly 12 years of sectarian violence to 2,076, including 336 British soldiers. The I.R.A. killed a Protestant militia major and a British soldier earlier in the week. The I.R.A. is fighting to abolish British rule and unite Ulster them with the 26 heavily Catholic provinces of Ireland."
