A life changing event caused me to think about what was really important.Advocate for policies that improve lives of people and familiesAdvocate for public educationAfter 15 year career supporting politicians, I wanted to use my experience to better land use, transportation and education in my communityAfter a long professional career, I was looking for a way to give back to my community now that I am mostly a stay-at-home parent.After volunteering for numerous community organizations for years, I decided to run for office because I could have a bigger impact with my contributions compared to other opportunities. I wanted to use  my skill set from my prior career for the benefit of my community.After working on statewide ballot initiatives, managing a school committee member's campaign, and working basically full-time on a statewide campaign, I knew as ready as I ever would be to a candidate.  I had stepped out as a leader on a divisive education issue and met many other parents from other schools.  I was asked by several politically active women to run.  I had a strong positive message about my experience with city services and public education to share, which centered on the access and equity.  I'm a natural community organizer, who operates with a strengths-based perspective (rather than Saul Alinsky's model, which helped me succeed in getting elected twice and in exerting influence on policy as an elected official.  Always been involved in education and this seemed to be the next logical step.Always wanted to make a difference and leave the world a better place. Am interested in political process.  Like being able to work with people in this process.  Also concerned about where our government policies are going and want to help correct them.As a Latina Mom Immigration Attorney Wife Advocate, I have a lot to contribute to our Country.   I am a former AUSA from Washington, D.C. I have served on various Commissions & Boards.   My voice is important for Immigrants and Latinos.   My husband is Jewish -- so we have a uniquely multicultural child...As a nonprofit professional and community activist, I am concerned about a range of issues including the environment, education, women's equality, health care for all, and peace - both in the home/family and in the world. Elected office would allow me to tackle a range of issues.As a teacher, I'd like to see some real education reform that will benefit students in the form of smaller class sizes, and benefit teachers in the form on higher teacher pay.As much as I love my city, I know that the great opportunities I had growing up here are still not available to all children due to institutional barriers. I also wanted to address homeless from a human rights and community perspective. Finally I wanted to promote food justice and community nutrition and fair wages for growers and culinary workersAttempt to improve the lives of people working and living in my county.Bad incumbent. Because a friend made meBecause I am hoping to make change in order to see a reflection of the values I hold held by the people that represent me.  My current Senator is being charged with 3 felony accounts of sexual assault on people that he employed and rented to.  I am running to ensure that the Vermont I live in is safe, vibrant, and affordable for my children.Because I believe more women should be making decisions and because I want to be a voice for working mothers and for my community. Because I did not like the job being done in our state Capitol and wanted to give children a voiceBecause I felt I had something to offer in terms of thoughtful consideration of the issues and others encouraged me to do so. Because I think I would make a very positive contribution; I would be good at itBecause I want to make a difference and advocate for my community, and I feel that I have the tenacity and toughness necessary to be successful in politics and be a true public servant.Because I wanted to help people in my state; I wanted to open doors for Native American candidates Because I wanted to make a difference - to make my community better and more inclusive.Because I wanted to serve my community and feel passionate about educational issues.because I wanted to serve my district at the time - many great opportunities in the area. I have since moved out of that district. Because I was encouraged to do soBecause my community asked me to. Also, 30% of New Mexico children's live in poverty and like them, I too grew up in poverty. However, the difference between them and I is that I lucked out along the way. I do not believe that a child should rely on luck to get by and because of that, I am running. Because my current delegate is an anti choice, anti gay, anti Medicaid expansion, republican bigot.Because no Dems were  runningBecause of my patients.  Cancer treatment can cost 38k a month and too many of my patients were forced to make the decision between treatment and dying, treatment and food, treatment and financial ruin.  Enough is enough! I knew it was time to take off my scrubs and put on a suit! We need more women to  run for office, but more importantly, we need clinicians who have taken an oath of "do no harm" recognizing that we do more harm when we aren't involved.  Because of the school trailers that the kids were taking classes in because the schools are over crowded and the state doesn't invest in money in school capital improvements, that upset me.  When an open seat occurred folks urged me to run. Because our district needs new, visionary leaders to address education inequities.Because there is currently corrupt leaders on our Council who misuse community funds and lack the skills necessary to deliver professional and skilled leadership. Because they needed someone to run and no one else volunteered.Becuase the central committee is a stepping stone to office that people have actually heard of. Believe I can make an impact and differenceBelieved I had the intelligence, empathy, and knowledge to represent my district well.best way to give back to my kids and my community. to create a neighborhood my kids can come back to and raise their own families. Better access to opportuntiy for all, not just privileged people like me.Bring about changeCare about having the perspective of young working mothers in our policy making arenasChange the worldChanges for equity in educationCity was on the wrong track; I had the background and skillset to make life better for constituents.Confidence in my ability to lead and desire to bring voice to an underrepresented constituency.Contemplated running for City Council in 2012, but did not rundedication to public service and belief that government is for the good of the peopleDesire to give back and make a differenceDiversify the tableDo good, leave a legacy, networkDon't think I have enough time or space to ever answer this question! I had always thought about running when I was older. Never thought I would run at 25. But I was passionate and we had a demagogue for a Governor and I got involved. The representative before me had to resign due to a scandal and I realized there was no reason I shouldn't run in my 20s. So I did and it's the best darn decision I ever made! Education, health economic issuesentrenched 10 year incumbent was not a strategic thinker, voter and I didn't like the votes he made on behalf of my WardFelt frustrated by the cost of housing in my area and wanted to help more people own a home. Felt I had something to contribute and a unique voiceFelt that it was the next logical step in my career progressionFor the good of our community For years I had volunteered for local and national campaigns and volunteered with the Democratic Party. On retiring to Arizona, I did the same. In AZ, I was asked to run for the State House. I had never considered myself to be a candidate. In my mind,  was a "worker bee". It took several months to be talked into it, but I finally agreed. Giving back to the community with genuine intentGood Democratic year 2008Gratitude and obligation for the benefits my family and I have received as first generation immigrantsGreat injustice and turmoil on the school board and to protect the voices of the teachers in the community that were not being recognized and considered in district decisions.Had 24 years of experience in the officeHad considered it for a long time, wanted to be involved at a higher level in my community helping to make decisions and shape the future.  Also wanted there to be a liberal voice on council, and more women in government. Had thought about it and was encouraged to run for office.have not run for office. appointment was to build political resume and gain experience with govt budgetshave not sought officeHave not yet decidedHaven't sought public office, but interested to help ensure transparency and equitable treatment for women, children, minorities and the elderly.Having worked in the classroom for close to a decade, I feel I have a perspective that many people do not. Working closely with my students and their families has provided me many opportunities to advocate for them and my community. I believe running for office will allow me to continue to do  that, but on another level.How can you say "someone ought to run" when you don't?  I did it to not be a hypocrite and to set an example.I am a community servant at heart. My goal is to be of service.I am a mother of two daughters and believe that every students deserves a quality education. My  community faces many socio-economic barriers and deserve to have leaders that understand their diverse needs. My commitment to equity and excellence will not allow me to sit on the side lines, but  work hard to make a difference.  I am compelled to run because the needs of my district are not being addressed by the current state representative, specifically fair funding for public education.I am constantly inspired by work happening in my community, and I have the skills to help bring that work to the State House.  I am driven to contribute my skills to better education for children and support for families.I am now in my 50's and my children are grown and on their own. I wanted to contribute to my community in some way that mattered since I am relatively unfettered. I decided to run because I had years of experience advocating for public higher education at the statewide level. I do feel a certain compulsion to contribute as much as I can for as long as I can. While I was always involved in my community, it never  entered my mind to run fo office when my kids were young.I am passionate about making a difference in my  community. I believe we deserve better representation than we currently have. I believe we need more women in office. I am passionate about the role of public education in creating opportunities for all children. I will run for the legislature because all of the funding decisions that effect our schools are made there. I am running for my daughter and for everyones daughter (and sons).I am tired of how hard life is for women in this country raising kids on their own.I am well known in my community and have a strong support system. I wanted to impact budget decisions by the legislature for Education, child protection and other social programs. Arizona ranks very poorly in all these areas and I am embarrassed to say I live in AZ.I began my interest in current events at a very young age after my brother was deployed for the first time, it blossomed into volunteering and active involvement by 14. After years of working on causes that I care about for the community and learning different ways to approach the process and make a difference, I feel that running for office would be a challenge that I am ready to tackle in order to get a chance at addressing issues I haven't been able to reach through other means.I believe I have balanced views and can offer logical solutions to social problems.I believe I have the time now that my kids are grown and feel a need to give back to my community and be helpful to my state.I believe it is critical that our local, state, and national government elect more women with Democratic values to office to achieve more of a gender balance among our representatives.  I recognize the dearth of women candidates, so I thought, why not me?  As a attorney, wife, mother, and advocate, I am qualified to hold office and possess the leadership skills needed to be an effective official.  Moreover, as a person who has faced adversity in my life due to my gender, economic status, and disability, and has long advocated for others, I feel I offer a unique perspective that is otherwise missing in politics.  As a mother and someone who loves my community and country, I feel an obligation to serve as best as I can to bring strong values and governance to my community.  I believed holding judicial office would be the pinnacle of public service in my profession.I believed I would be a better fit for the community than the incumbent.I can't think of a better job than helping to consider information and make decisions that will improve the quality of life for members of my community. I care about my community and felt I was more qualified for the position than the other candidates seeking the position.I care about the community in which I live and the future of our Nation! I am a strong leader and enjoy being a voice for the people, to ensure equal opportunities for everyone.I care deeply about my community and believe public service is the highest way to serve. I also ran against my current city council who I believe does not have our cities best interest in mind. I also felt there needed to be younger and more women representation.I care deeply about public transportation and was not happy with some of the decisions being made by previous boards. I ran so that I could change the direction of the agency and make sure that the agency could continue providing robust transit service far into the future.I care deeply about quality public education and advocating for the needs of teachers and students. I also live in a community with a historic GOP machine, but a new majority of Dems in the electorate. Our local govt is still controlled by all Republicans, which does not represent the full community. I wanted to expand representation, and increase transparency and accountability. I consider seeking office - whether appointed or elected - because our current leaders are destroying our state's safety net and don't feel obligated to represent the interests of half of our state.I decided to run for office to work on the state's long-term care system, improve care for those receiving it in the system, and improve working conditions for its direct care workers.I decided to seek office to actively help create Healthier Communities and a Healthier Democracy which will improve the quality of life for ALL.I decided very early in my professional career to run for elected office.  I was further inspired when my children started school and saw little to no diversity in the elected body.  I am the first Latina to serve on my current school board.    i did not appreciate the policies being implemented by the sitting commissioner.I did not believe that our current school board had the background to adequately address the concerns of our changing demographics, wanted to fight for high quality education for all children.I did not decide to seek office.  I participated in Emerge to learn more about working on political campaigns.I did not feel represented by my current city council member.I didn't see too many people who looked like me (Asian American female) in public office and felt like I could contribute a different perspective in policymaking decisions. I had worked behind the scenes to affect policy change and realized that the best way to make meaningful change is to be in office. I didn't.  Now that I understand the political process in NV and how it really works (and who the real players are), I understand that running for office is not for me.I disagreed with the decisions being made by my elected officials and their complacency in office. I feel strongly about certain issues and topics, and feel that a women's voice needs to be heard and representedI felt compelled to give back to the community that had given me and my family so much.  In addition I believe that it is very, very important t o add more women's voice to political discourse and to leadership. This is not just for equity purposes for but for balanced perspectives.I felt I was the best candidate with my record, experience and training.  The community couldn't stand the other candidates.I felt my voice was needed at the table. I felt qualified for the job.I felt strongly that the role was not being run well by current office holderI felt to accomplish what is needed for my community, I could only achieve so much without the authority of the elected position. I was tired of lousy representation for our area on the county board of supervisors.I found myself frustrated with the previous State Assembly person in my district and was complaining about his lack of response and action. so I did what my Mom taught me and rather than complaining I decided to do something about it and ran for office.I grew increasingly concerned about our economy and the increase in families living in poverty. I was also felt that one of our state senators from our district was completely out of touch with the lives of average Vermonters.I had a very difficult moment in my professional career. In that moment I realized I wasn't living into my full potential. After having this epiphany, I decided to run. I had always been a bit of a do gooder and an activist.  I was involved in lots of civic, church, and volunteer organizations.  I always had an interest in running for office, but didn't know how.  I had a family member who was killed by gun violence.  I was so angry that so few elected officials work on this important issue.  I decided to run, because I wanted to make an impact on this issue and a policy perspective seemed like the best way to do so.I had always wanted to run.  Politics, policy making are my passion.  I was also sick of not having a seat at the Table.  I had briefly thought about running for the position I ran for, but had plans to attend law school. The county executive at the time called me and asked me to run. After many conversations with friends, family and political leaders I identified needs in my community and felt that I could meet those needs if elected. One of the motivating factors in my run for county board was that this particular seat was traditionally represented by a man, and my win was the first win for a woman in that seat in over a decade. Since my term another Emerge Alum has been elected to the seat. I had the experience and always wanted to run. My background is heavily rooted in community activism and the incumbent decided to resign.I have a unique skill set that is needed in the Legislature. I have expertise necessary for processing policy on health care. I am represented by an incumbant who is not voting in a way that the district benefits.  He has to go.  My graduate education was paid for by tax payers money so I must pay it forward.I have a unique understanding from my law practice of mental health as well as youth in foster care/delinquency.  I am a woman of color and recognize and feel angered over the great racial disparities in our court system.  I ran, and will run again, because I want greater accountability and recourse for these disparities. I have always been interested and somewhat politically active. I couldn't run before this because my husband was employed by state and local governments. I have always been involved in my community in many leadership positions . Seems like a natural next stepI have always thought I would run for office one day, because I believe I could make a difference in my community and I enjoy policy and legislative work.I have faced many challenges in my own life. I was able to advocate for myself and pull myself up. Now it's my turn to do the same for others.I have lots of ideas about how to make the world betterI have not decided to seek office. When going through the Emerge Training I wanted to run for the School Board locally, but have never moved toward the commitment. I have not yet decided.  However, I am driven by creating more opportunities for women in MarylandI have not yet.I have not yet. I grew up in a household where we debated politics every night at the dinner table. I believe that we can make a difference and have dedicated my professional career to public service. But the public scrutiny and lack of privacy that come with it, as well as the difficulty in achieving life-work balance give my reservations. I know I could do it, but do I want to? I have the skills set (for government process and people skills) that would serve our state/voters. Plus, I LOVE my state. I'm a native and deeply and passionately committed to caring for all our citizens.I have worked as an governmental appointed official since 1983. I was ready to seek an elected position and increase the # of women in the Ky SenateI have worked in advocacy for healthcare, education, and gender equality for a long time. I understand. Women need to be at the table when decisions and laws are made because Women are represented, when women representI have worked most of my life in the helping profession, social services & wanted to work on policies to make a greater impactI haven't run for government office...yet.I haven't sought office. I haven't sought office. I did have an appointed position when I was in my senior year of high school with my small town's Environmental Commission, but I did not seek that appointment - they sought me out for that job. I have not held office since, especially since I was with the federal government for nearly 10 years and was under the Hatch Act I haven't yet sought an elected office, and never really sought the appointed office - being on that committee is a requirement of my job. I've considered running for elected office because I like to believe I could change some policies that would result in a better quality of life. I haven't yet sought office because my career takes a significant amount of time and effort to manage, and does not allow me to affiliate with a political party. I haven't.I helped pass legislation in the early 90's to successfully reduce DWI's in NM, was an activist for Healthcare reform as MoveOn area coordinator, and helped Obama campaign in 2008.  When I was asked to run, I said yes!I hoped that buy securing the president seat at my local union i could make a difference in the work life of my fellow union members.I knew I could do a better job that the incumbent at the time. He was not responsive to constituents.I know I can contribute to the processI live in a heavily Republican Legislative District and it is hard to recruit Democratic candidates for the State Legislature.  I am a strong supporter of public education and believed my district needed a voice in support of public education funding and support for progressive causes such as women's access to health care, responsible resource management, and addressing our high levels of childhood poverty.I love my hometown and want to make it a better place, and thought I could do a better job than my predecessor.I love my hometown. I had the experience, legal background and community background to win and make a difference once in office.I love my town and I think it's in need of youthful energetic new leadershipI love serving my community.  It is a value instilled in me by my mother who was eternally grateful for having the ability to immigrate to the United States.I love to serve.I loved my town and wanted to be apart of making it a better stronger city. I believed that the elected council was too concerned about their own well being, and was not taking a broad enough look at what was best for everyone in the city. I was passionate about education and the environment as well as the success of local small business, arts and non profits. I progressively became more involved in politics, worked on Congressional campaign, served as State Director for Congresswoman and then my state representative retired and I was asked to run. The opportunity presented itself at a good time in my life. I ran (and won) for a spot as an elections official for two reasons. 1. I believe in encouraging active participation in the political process.. 2. It seemed like an easy place to start. It only really required a few days of work per year, but it still forced me to knock on doors and get signatures to get my name on the ballot. I should also clarify that I no longer hold that position, as I moved to accommodate a family member's education. I ran for a nonprofit office not public office.  I did it because I believed I would be an effective leader of the organizationI ran for Board of regents because I had experience & enjoyed serving on policy setting boards.   I did not win.   I then volunteers with the County Democratic Party & worked on other campaigns, during my arm merge training I decided to run for a newly created judicial office I ran for the MD House of Delegates and lost to 2 Tea Party incumbents, but will run again. I believe we can have more effective representation in our state govt than the current incumbents. I will run again in 2018. (FYI, my county has NEVER elected a woman to the state legislature.)I ran for Town Meeting after someone encouraged me to do so.  I wanted to get more involved in my town and learn about the issues important to the community. I saw my mother's advocacy work while growing up.She recruited low income children and sign them up for the head start programI see my town sliding into depression and obscurity. My ward (the most socioeconomically and racially diverse in the town) in particular is disenfranchised with a lack of services and empty storefronts.  We suffer from an absentee councilman and as such have a disproportionate share of the few services our town enjoys.  As a mother and a taxpayer, I have a vested interest in ensuring our ward retains a voice and want to help navigate our town into a future my daughter would love to inherit.I sought office at the municipal level to determine if I had the interest and capacity to seek higher elected officeI sought to run because I felt a need to represent the diverse community I live in.I started out volunteering on various committees and commissions, and as I met people currently serving in government, I kept having the feeling that I could do a better job than them.  I ran for school board because I believe strongly in the power of education and believe that our district needs to raise the bar for its students.I still haven't decided if I will seek office. That said, I believe we need to see good people in public office in order for the system to change for those in the lower eschelons of society. I thought I could do a better job at leading the department.  I thought I could serve my community well.I thought I had something to contribute, especially in a board setting because I had done that before. I thought would be the best to serve in that office.I want more women representing the interest of women.I want to advocate for policies that advance human rights, provide opportunities for our K-12 students to attend equitable schools, and to shape the values this country holds towards marginally oppressed populations. I want to be part of the policy-making decisions that affect our daily lives.I want to be the change that I see in the world. I have always been passionate about public service and holding an elected office where I have a seat at the table as well as the authority to influence the decision making process. I want to change how gov't works.  But it's too much work, too time consuming, to frustrating to get involved - I believe can be more effective in the private sector or the non-profit sector where I currently work.  I want to create positive change and bring an educators voice to education lawmakingI want to get things doneI want to have a hand in policy-making and improving the quality of life in my community.I want to hold a leadership office and direct policy for my community I want to move agendas and not wait for other decision-makers. I want to work on behalf of others and make impactful changes. I want to do what's right and help improve lives.I want to provide a Democratic voice to my district, which is threatened after the Democratic incumbent switched to the Republican Party. I want to seek office because I believe I have good ideas, know how to compromise, and want to help my community.I wanted better schools for my children and there was no one else willing to run for the office who could hold the seat. I wanted our county to move forward...to develop and follow through on a plan that was progressive, intentional and focused.  A major reason...our 6 grandchildren!I wanted the democratic office holder to wake up and realize that there were constituents who were not happy with her standing in her office I wanted the opportunity to have a part in the decision making process I wanted to affect positive change and become involved in the community I wanted to be a role model to others in my community and to serve my community.I wanted to be a voice for minoriries and educate others on Native American issues. I wanted to be able to serve my community.I wanted to be more involved in making positive change in the area in which we lived. There were no local positions available due to living in an unorganized territory, so I chose state level office as a goal.I wanted to be the decider of public policy.I wanted to change the way we fund education,bring back vocational studies into high school, give young people the tools they need for a technology powered economy. I also want to bring high paying jobs into my area.I wanted to have a say in how I am governed.I wanted to have a voice in the policy making decisions for me, my family, community and those who are often overlooked in the processI wanted to help change our community.I wanted to help my city get back to the thriving place I knew it could beI wanted to help my school board and the kids. I wanted to make a difference and forward issues that I care about.I wanted to make a difference for the children of my communityI wanted to make a difference in my kids school. I wanted to make a difference.I wanted to make a difference.I wanted to make a difference. I wanted to make government more accessible to residents.I wanted to make policy to address and solve the issues I am concerned about.I wanted to positively affect policy for the residents in my community.I wanted to run for County Clerk after the former Clerk retired in 2000, after holding office for 30 years. I really admired her, but was very busy with family and very shy to run. Then decided to run in 2010, because I was not impressed with the Clerk who took over.I got trounced. The county I live in is mostly conservative. Then was approached by the dems in 2012 to run for state senate against an incumbent Republican.I wanted to run....help change things and to serve my community.I wanted to serve in Augusta to be at the table, making policy decisions that impact me as a woman and as a member of the LGBT community. I wanted to serve my community and believe those of us who are gifted have an obligation to give back. I believe in public education and felt I could contribute to making our local colleges better.I wanted to serve my community and ensure that my voice had a place at the table. I am a County Commissioner (appointed) and have been elected to the DNC through my state party. I am not an elected officeholder, but may run in the future. For now, I want to hone my skills, build my brand, and bring something new/different to the conversation. (I was one of two women out of twenty-one members of our commission, one of the few under 40, many have served more than 20 years on the commission, so I am shaking things up a bit. And now have been named Vice-Chair and the Chair of a Task Force in my first year.I was a social justice advocate for schools and community, then realized that elected officials made important decisions that impact equality and safety for all.I was angry about the Republican agenda in 2004. I decided I had to help get us back to a Dem agenda. Despite 10 years of my effort, the Republicans are stronger than ever. And everything I feared has come to pass.I was appointed and the agreement was that I'd run for reelectionI was asked to apply for appointment.I was asked to run for school board and found that opportunity to be immensely rewarding -- being able to make positive change for the people of your community is an amazing opportunity.I was asked to run several years in a row and I have the experience that I believe is needed to be effective in political office having been active in my commnuity, experience as a lawyer, a CEO and many years ago in another career, a counselor to juvenile delinquents.  I am a moderate and able to build consensus, something that many politicians of both parties are unwilling or unable to do.I was asked to run.  Had never considered it before.  Explored the details of the office and evaluated the time commitment then decided to give back to my community.I was asked to. I want to be a voice in decision-making. I want to serve my community and be an ally to less privileged communities. I was at a Dem. State Com. meeting when party leaders asked me to run. They told me that I would not win in 2014 bc my district is one of the worst gerrymandered district, but the race would set me up for 2016 when more Dem's. come out in Presidential general & w Hillary on more women will vote.I was disappointed in the state of our educational programs and with 2 special needs children, I wanted to make a difference for them and children like them. I was disgusted with the attacks on open clean government, education, and labor in my state.  I found my current representative to be a carpet bagger that was out of touch with my community.I was encouraged to run and I am so glad that I did. I was encouraged to run for office by the leadership of my union. I was frustrated with dealing with bad decisions made on behalf of my clients. I wanted to be a decision-maker.I was inspired by John F. Kennedy, as a child; by George H.W. Bush to volunteer, years back; and by President Obama to seek office to better my community.I was interested in serving as a judge. I was on the Human Rights Committee and was frustrated by the committees inability to affect changes within the city. I had also been very active in my youngest child's PTO, and have a passion for Education. the School Committee seemed a logical next step.I was tired of seeing radical conservatives in office voting against most people's best interests. Also, at the local level, my Alderperson voted against a rezoning request that would have allowed a new school to be built even though the referendum for the school board to purchase the property had passed with close to 60% of the vote.I was unhappy with the current county leadership especially the lack of support for public education and human services and wanted to bring my leadership skills and community activism to the table in a new role. I wasn't satisfied with the names being tossed around for the Democratic nominee for the state senate. I wanted someone better to run...someone who was not a 50something white male. No one knew who else could do it. So I decided to jump in.I wasn't seeing people in office that shared my same viewsI worked for the County Clerk's Office for many years.  The position of Clerk became open unexpectedly and I decided if I didn't "go for it' I would always regret it.I worked in Early Childhood Education then in Social Work with low-income and homeless women and families. Over time, I became increasingly frustrated helping people navigate broken systems and decided it was time to start changing those systems. I first became involved in advocacy and public policy work, eventually running for office to increase my impact. I would like to be a judge.  I have tried to be appointed to the office.  However, I have not yet been appointed even though I have excellent credentials.  I will run the next time there is an open seat.I would love to represent my community, to make it the best place possible. IŠ—Èm running because I want Oregon to be a place where everyone who works hard has a fair shot to succeed in life, regardless of their background. I believe weŠ—Ère headed in the right direction as a state, and I am excited about the recent work the legislature has done around expanding economic opportunity for working families. But the reality is that many families in our community are still struggling, and thereŠ—Ès still more we need to do. And I believe I can make a difference. IŠ—Ève spent my 15-year career in the private sector helping businesses pay their workers fairly and making companies great places for employees to work. That perspective will be important as we continue to think about what kind of place we want Oregon to be, for both workers and businesses.If I were to seek public office it would be to replace a right-wing republican delegate.I'm a big believer in the idea that if you're not involved in the solution, you have no right to complain about the problem. I also wanted to ensure that more women were in leadership roles, and I felt that I could make a difference. I'm angry and saddened by the actions undertaken by Gov. Walker and the members of his party. Ever since they turned down federal funds for high speed rail, and then initiated Act 10 which harmedt teachers and other public employees, I've been disappointed, but there seems to be a new outrage every week. Primarily concerned about big cuts to public education, and increases to private vouchers - which are not accountable.   Also threats to natural resources and clean government.  This state has been harmed by these actions. When no one else stepped up to run for this rural district, I was asked to by the state party chair, Martha Laning. I finally said yes. I hated the thought that there would be no competition and that the GOP now in office would be re-elected without having to defend his record.  I will make him defend his record. I'm good at what I do and can make a difference.Improve my community, change policy, foster better education and opportunity for my childrenimprove the quality of public schoolsInitially I was recruited! Now I find great satisfaction in serving as mayor, am term limited and want to continue serving - so I am running for state rep in a compact district that is my home. Interest in pubic serviceInterested in education, social justice, people of color equality, policies that support equality be it health, education, etc.Interested in getting involved to make changes in the state. Interested in promoting efforts of small business and economic development and felt it would be interesting to do from inside government.interested in topicIt was the right time in my life as my children, parents and grandchild were all stable and my husband was a rock of support. And I wanted to be a District Court JudgeIt's a positive way to affect change. It's hard to be brief! It's what I have always felt called to do, and other people have asked me to serve. I loved being elected, I love campaigning. Solving big public problems is the best work I've ever had.It's my way of continuing to serve my community.It's taken a long time to realize my voice made a difference, and I've realized through training others for leadership that my voice represents many other underrepresented people in our state. If we don't have more people raising concerns and recognizing diverse experiences, we can't hope to solve the diverse problems affecting us.Leadership and interest in improving justice system for childrenLeadership in the Community; passionate about educationLifelong goal to serve the community Like most people I thought I could make a positive difference.Make a difference make a difference and serve Vermont and its peopleMake an impact in the criminal justice system, play a leadership role in changing the systemMore women need to be in politics in order for progressive policies to pass.Mostly because I am opininated but also because I have concerns about what happens around me and feel I have ideas for improving the conditions around me. my agenda of dealing with climate change was not being addressed aggressively enough. My city needs female representation on the City CouncilMy passion for my community and the citizens who voices are not heard, and it's my duty to make a difference and give back.My town was headed in the wrong direction!Needed a change in leadership. neither the needs, nor the beauty of my community are being represented by anyone on the council. No gain if you are not part of the conversation -at the table!No good candidates running for the officeNo one has opposed current representative, he has very different views, and he has done nothingNow that my kids are a little older, I have more time and wanted to find some worthwhile way to use my skills and talents to serve my community. Offered myself to public serviceOur cars and cats keep getting hit by speeding drivers, for 10 years I tried to get the City I live in to help all my neighborhood and was completely ignored.  So while I want us to have Climate Action Plan, Healthy and complete street plans and improve our economic base, it was the then existing council and city managers inattentiveness to the public that lead me to run for local office.Our community deserved to be represented by someone who would fight for our values and for investment in our community.Our precinct councilor was not running again; I felt there was a need to push for transparency in our local government, and an opportunity for progressives to expand their influence.People in elective office are there, first and foremost, to solve problems.  I see too few of our elected officials who consider themselves "problem solvers" as a primary characteristic.  I am a problem solver concerned with results more than I am concerned with the politics of the job.  Since there aren't enough people like that in office, I would like to be one of those people in that role.politically active my entire lifePower is in position. Those with positions have power. Those with power make decisions. We need to be in those seats to make decisions. Public service is the best way to serve.  You can do the most good for the most people.  I believe strongly that women need to serve in elected office so that decisions made in government address the needs and concerns of children and families.  I am an instrument of this movementPublic service, have a voice about health care issues and child and family issuesPublic service, the need for good progressives in my area, finally had time to do so.Rather than constantly writing, emailing, calling and visiting my state center and not having him respond i a positive way, I will run against him and seek to truly listen to and respond to my constituents. Gateway issue: education, an issue that I want to address along with jobs, infrastructure and behavioral and mental healthy, none which my rep effectively addresses.Recruited. Passionate about education and the issues around education matching the learning styles of students.Right time of my lifeSaw the systemic defunding of public education in ArizonaScott Walker and Act 10Sense of responsibility to contribute to my communityServe my community Serve on commission for women and serve on commission for federal block grantsServe the American publicService.  I feel like its a calling to use all the experience and skills I've gained to make the world better.  If not me, then who?Someone asked me and I thought I would try itSomeone needed to do it. I'm the best quaifiedSomeone who inspires me was shot and it was like a wake-up call to do more with my life.Strongly disapproved of positions taken by the incumbentThe district I represent is one of the most diverse in the state and needed someone in office who could be a champion on issues like equity and policies that support women and working families. I wanted to make sure my community had a strong voice fighting for them at the state level.The Emerge experience brought out the confidence I needed to day, yes, I'm qualified to run. Let's do this. And I did. The is much to be done that isn't getting done.The judge at that time had been involved in some scandals and I was unhappy with the direction the county was going.The love for our democracy, lost of interest in local politics by the community, low voter turnout and foreseeable corruption, and public dollars being privatized. The people are not represented. I would like to serve in office to ensure more voices are heard.The people representing me did not share my values.The person in the job was doing a bad jobThe personal has become political.  There is great need for political awareness especially in a state that espouses to be a majority, minority state.There was a vacancy in my district, a trustee who is a friend and was on the County Board at the time asked me to run. I agreed because I'm passionate about improving the quality of public education for Black students. This Board has oversight of county court schools, expulsions, juvenile hall education, and inter district  / transfers.Black students are disproportionately affected in all these areas and I wanted to a voice advocate for them. I also live in an affluent, high performing NOT diverse city Piedmont that has a very successful and effective  special education program which I have worked in. All of this to say I had much to offer as a Trustee.There was an empty seat and I knew I had the experience, knowledge and skills to get the job done and move the party forward.Thought I could do a good job, deal intelligently with issues, make an impact on the communityTired of lobbying legislators not as intelligent/connected as I.To advance progressive issues and ideasTo assist and help constituents who do not have a voice to support better education funding, better transportation, and better opportunities for employment.To be a representative for my communityTo be a representative voice for my community. It's a Latino majority city and district and only one Latino has ever been elected to public office since the city's incorporation over 120 years ago. Also, I am tired of conservative good old boy network that runs the city.To be a voice for my community To be a voice for persons with disabilities To be a voice for the community in addressing key issues such as economic development, environment, affordable housing, jobs/housing imbalance to mention a few.To be in a position to create change and improvementTo be more involved in the local political structureto be the change I desired To benefit my community, as I am the type of person who get things done and have for the past 30 years. Improve the quality of life for everyone. To better the community and to raise awareness of social justice issues. to bring a young voice to council. The average age of the city is 34 and the youngest elected  (besides me) is 50To bring my values and organizing skills to the service of my community.  To move from small scale impacts through schools, organizations, etc. to impact the larger community.  To help my community be a leader in civil rights, equity and in combating climate change. To challenge and change the current system of democracy and policy making and to offer a female voice for the district that I live in. to change bad law; to add a voice and point of view lacking in the State Legislature.To change education policy for children of color in the San Francisco Unified School DistrictTo change educational policy--increase high quality early education for economically disadvantaged and decrease criminalization in secondary education.To change my community. / To contribute my skills and background to the party organization, to make a difference, to "do" something about all the things I've been complaining aboutTo contribute to and shape my community and provide a voice for our children in education.To create legislation and politics to advance women, children and families.To do my partTo do my part to make the world a better place. To effect change at the local level, the level that interacts the most directly with constituents. To effect change in urban development, protect natural resources and bring more openness to local government.To engage in a living democracy, to bring my own vision into an area of our world that I thought could / BenefitTo ensure women were represented in drafting revisions to the City Charter and then to improve quality of education in the local school district especially for low income studentsTo fight for environmental protections, for renewable energy, for women's rights, and more.To fight for the working people and bring the community together To give a voice to progressive values and be of service to my community.To give backTo give back to my communityTo give back to my community, and make my corner of the world a little better.To have a seat at the table, to push feminist policy, to challenge myself to serve the piblicTo have a voice for those who don't or can't.To have a vote and platform on important issues. To improve the quality of life in my city To have an active voice in formation of policies to reduce the impact of climate change, find solutions to address our crumbling physical infrastructure, and fight for water policies which ensure environmental justice for those with no voice in the system - the poor and the environment. to have input on policies that affect people in my community.To help improve the communityTo help move my community forward and bring progressive values to city hall.To help my community To help sustain quality public education in my townTo help the people of Eastern KY rise out of economic distress. To be able to look at myself in the mirror and know that I have tried to make a positive difference in my world.To help with the representation gap by increasing women in public office. I'm smart and should be running things. To improve our community.To improve the education that our students were receiving and to give back to a community that gave me so much.To improve the quality of life for my city, to make its streets more accessible for all ages, to make it possible for my kids to live here when I grow up.to include diverse voices and advocate for equalityTo lead and reform.To make a difference and a voice of the communityTo make a difference and contribute. To make a difference in my community To make a difference in my community To make a difference in my community and ensure the City government accurately represented the diversity of the City and its needs.To make a difference in my community.  / To make a difference in my State and my communityTo make a difference, to change the status quo and have representation that was relevant to myself and the community is why I decided to seek office.To make a difference.To make a difference. To make a difference. Open access to underrepresented in public policy and administrative field. To serve as a role model for others. To contribute to the macro public good To make a difference; to see change; to work on issues I care about; I would rock it.To make a positive contribution.To make a positive impact on my community , for children, and especially those with disabilities To make a positive impact on the day-to-day lives of my family and community.To make a real difference in the world and my community To make an impact on improving the world around me.To make change for our communityTo make change for the betterTo make changes in the all male arena where it's not about the people but those are more interested is saying they hold an office than working towards change or making a difference instead they just go with the flowTo make Fitchburg a better city for my Grandchildren & the children of Fitchburg!To make things better for my kids.To measurably affect change and represent my region which is often ignored by the legislature.To offer a different perspective on discussions on gender inequity, education  and environmental concernsTo participate in making changes I thought needed to be made in my city and state.To promote the principals of the Democratic Party and to serve the people of my District To provide citizens with a viable choice to have a Clerk who has experience both inside and outside of the Clerks Office.To represent my community of colorTo represent the community of colorTo serve at a higher level of public service, leadership and accountability, advocating for critical issues, policies, programs, services and funding needed in our community. To educate, inform and impact lives, influence decisions and help secure results that most benefit those in and beyond my community. To serve families, to make a difference in students' lives, to change laws that impact education and health care To serve my communityTo serve my community and bring strong leadership to the governing bodyTo serve my community and make a difference.To serve my community and to work with people of my community to improve their living conditions while diversifying the political environment.To serve others. To serve people. To make the transit system more equitable and effectiveTo support Democratic values, particularly economic security and access to reproductive health care and family planning, acceptance of all (non-discrimination).  Also key are access to quality education through the life span, college affordability.  to support the needs of the communityTo take the next step in leadership at the local level after working in local government for 15 years.To upgrade our deimcratic party to align current practices for GOTV and field workTo work on issues in education and poverty Unhappy with job incumbent is doing.  Ideological differences with incumbent.  Unhappy with state of local school system.  Believe I could make a positive difference.Virginia's Legislature is majority Republican and they are leading the state into the past. The efforts by the GOP to discriminate against every non-white male segment of the population are shameful and harmful to the state as a whole. They need to be voted out and a strong Democrat/Progressive is needed to bring Virginia forward and on the right side of history.Voices like me and around me not representedWant to serve Wanted to bring relational authenticity to the office. Wanted to contribute to my community and I wanted to stay involved with an area in which I have expertise (health)Wanted to contribute to my community in positive wayWanted to do good.Wanted to ensure that people were included in the decisions that affect their livesWanted to have a greater impact and be apart of the solution for change. Wanted to make the city more appealing to millennials. Also there were only 2 people under the age of 50 on Council. Wanted to see change in my neighborhood/community.Was recruited by another member of the board; have close professional ties to the subject matter of the elected officeWas unhappy with a position taken and in particular the attitude of my predecessor We need more feminists in office.While a student here at UW-Madison, I discovered my passion for working to make sure every young person felt empowered to speak their mind. I was heavily involved in campus activism, and wanted to continue being an active community member. As a young woman, I didn't feel represented in government (right now, women make up only 30% of the Dane County Board). I wanted to make sure my neighbors in the campus community always had an advocate that they could count on. Wisconsin uprising/Walker. I wanted to make positive change.Young, professional women need a voice in the political process  and I intend to be loud and bold in bringing that voice to the State Senate and eventually the US Senate