Afraid of my Debt, and not having money to live or someone to take care of my daughter Mostly because of negative experiences within the local Democratic Party. Also, the office I was originally interested in ( School Board) is less attractive and unpaid and the other position I am interested in ( County Commissioner ) is currently held by someone I admire and who does great work.  / (1) Pay for City Council (contemplated office) too low to do as only job, but job too large to do well on part-time basis (esp. with children still at home) / (2) Disdain for ratio of fundraising/political shmoozing to  engagement with actual policy issues1.  Friendly incumbents in office / 2.  I hold elected positions in my local, regional, state, and national union. So, my time is spread pretty thin.   /  / However, I hope that when an opening develops I will be able to stop some of my other work and run for office. 1. Haven't had the right opportunity in my districts yet.  /  / 2. Need to be more financially stable1. It's a blood sport where I live and the process of running feels too daunting. 2. I like to have some time for myself and with my kids, spouse and friends. 3. While I think I would be a good legislator, my current job (in policy advocacy) allows me to fight for the things I care about without having to horse trade with people I don't respect. 1. Time Commitment.  I don't feel like I can give the time my potential constituents deserve given that I work full time in a city 60+ miles from where I live.  I'm the primary household earner.  I have to work.  Also concerns about giving my family the time it deserves. / 2. Nastiness of politics.  I'm not confident I have thick enough skin.  People are awful to elected officials regardless of whether the elected official deserves it.1. Too intrusive in my personal life. / 2. Too much focus on fundraising. / 3. Am not 100% aligned with Democratic Party platform (I'm more liberal)Afraid of the personal scrutiny, dislike fundraising and not good at answering questions on the fly. Also hard to keep integrity when so much compromise is required. After participating in the Emerge Program I better understand the complexities of fundraising.  I live in a big city and the money needed is enormous and I don't have name recognition yet. At 27 years old, I am working to establish myself in the community and build connections.  I am also working to gain political experience through Emerge and working with active campaigns. In two years, I plan on running and feel I will have the experience and name recognition needed to run at that point. At 28, I've considered myself too young to seriously run for office and have dedicated myself to learning the nuts and bolts of both campaigns and public policy by working on campaigns or for the government. Because I am 23-years-oldBecause I don't want my past, private, and personal life in the spotlight.   I also don't subscribe to the democratic party nor my union status quo.  It's too constricting and short sided. And the fundraising portion is horrible. If there were someone else in charge of the funding--it would be a lot easier. Because I had a baby the year i would have probably run for office and now am not sure if i plan to stay in Arizona long term. / Because I was turned off by the amount of self I felt like I had to sacrifice. I was also discouraged by how difficult it is to break into city politics. Finally, I would like to have impact on issues that are larger that street pavement and light repair.Because the Democratic party does not seek or encourage women with disabilities to run. Because when my name is floated the first question is always "Is she healthy enough" not "is she qualified."Because the seat that I want is occupied by a party leader/fellow Emerge alum. I have been pushed to run for other offices but I find them less of a fit with my interests, skills and schedule. Been building professional careerBeen in medical school so don't have time yet.Busy raising a family and working. I live in a rural, Republican dominated district so a Dem is unlikely to win. I can only run for county or statewide office.Can't balance family with legislative session, not interested in any local officeChildcareChildren too young, financial not yet independent. But am transitioning into being ED of the non-profit I foundedConcerned about the economic impact on my family as I am the primary wage earner. Secondary concern at having my personal life or private medical decisions publicly trashed by negative campaigning. Conflict with my job. current democrat will not step down from office held for 30 yearsCurrently running. Decided not for meDecided to dedicate more time to my family.Determined that I'm better behind the scenes and don't want to run. Also DC does not have actual voting rights and the City Council is a mess. Didn't think I had what it takes to run for office. Just finished emerge and there were no positions for me to run for during this election cycle.Didn't want to Do not want to ask for monetary support.Don't think it's the right time in my life just yet. Emerge Arizona is not collaborative. / The group is filled with self-absorbed women, led by Katie Hobbs. / This cluster of women is exclusive, have harmed other women's careers and political prospects.  / The lack of financial support, public support and even endorsements of Emerge graduates has impacted the number of women that decide to run. / The lack of leadership of the elected Emerge women is embarrassing and the Emerge "sisterhood" is entirely focused on self-preservation of the mediocre elected women.  / Evaluate the number of women who began Emerge but didn't make it through the program or graduated but no longer affiliate with Emerge and these patterns will reveal themselves.Family commitments and demands of my paid job. I can't risk my income to take a leave and run for office - have two kids in/almost in college Fear. I'm single  and I think that'll be embaressing. And make me less qualified as I don't have a husband or kids yet.  Financial obligations (student loans, in particular). Financial. Need to care for family. Focused on changing careers in my 20s and pursued another BA to successfully do so. Also, I moved out of my hometown to another nearby city and I don't feel as invested in my new town.For a while I rented my home, and I knew I was going to buy someday. Now that I bought my house I have a better idea of what seats to run for. Found it too cliquish;  requires too much time and money.Found that my skills were more useful behind the scenes.  Too often women are encouraged to run but they do not know how to navigate once they are in the capitol.  Frequently, they have to depend on the very people who have made government problematic to teach them the legislative ropes.Full-time employed in municipal government Funding, network / Had 2 opportunities to run for state office and most likely would have won both times. Could not run either time because I did not have the financial ability to quit or take leave from my day job and support myself during a campaign due to 10 years of working in extremely low paying political jobs now. I finally have a job where I am paid fairly and am setting aside money to run for office. Were it not for money, I would have ran for both seats. The men who ended up winning were both wealthy attorneys--the same age as me. Additionally, one of the times I considered running I was a state employee so I could not fundraise for myself, which makes it next to impossible to raise enough money for what was a very high dollar race, especially given it was a special election.  I have tried to change the law prohibiting state employees form fundraising for their own campaigns to no avail. Hate politics Have been learning more about it, working with my community and my party (local and state levels).Have not decided on officeHaven't decided if I want to be an elected official, or to continue working in a staff role.Haven't lived in a favorable democratic district.Haven't settled down into one location where I will be for more than a year... currently on my seventh state, want to run for office when I settle and actually live somewhere for a considerable amount of time. Not done exploring yet!Having a young child as a single parent. Health issuesHouse hunting to purchase our first home and would like to then run in the town we buy in.I am I am a candidate currently. I am a single parent with no family here. I have a demanding job and children who are heavily involved in sports. I made the calculated decision to wait until they graduate from high school before I decide to run so that they have the opportunities they need to succeed.I am a state employee and am not allowed under state constitution to hold certain elected positions.I am completely disillusioned with American politics and refuse to take part in the horse race. I am currently living abroad and had this long trip planned since graduating from Emerge. Upon returning to the US, I will reconsider running for local office.I am currently runningI am currently running for officeI am currently running for office, but before Emerge I did not think that I was "cut out" for campaigning and I thought I did not have enough experience.I am currently running.  I need more time.I am currently working for the Dept of Defense and living outside of the US, but I hope to run for office at some point in the future.I am interested, but have a special needs child that requires a lot of attention at the moment.I am living abroad (in London) and working at a legal/political NGO, so choosing to influence politics in a different way. I am not able to work full time and run for office at the same time.I am not currently living where I want to run.I am not ready.I am now running for city councilI am presently enrolled in a Doctoral Studies program for education. I plan to run toward the end of my program. I will also be using this time to canvass and phone bank for other candidates, as well as feel out the political landscape as my husband and I begin searching for a home. I am raising a 3 yo and a 9 month old in addition to working full-time and getting my MBA, so time is the biggest reason. I'm targeting 2018 to run for office.I am running for office right now. I am running.I am still in college and do not have a permanent residence in this state.I am the primary income earner for my family. Our two major expenses are childcare and student loans. If I lose income to run a campaign or win ano elected seat that forces me to take a leave of absence, then I put my family at financial risk.I am waiting for the incumbent State legislator to retire or run for a different office, at which time he has pledged to endorse and support my run his seat. He is expected to run for a different office in the next two or three years.I am working on my JD and then wish to practice for about 5 years before running for office.I am young and new to politics.  I want to learn the system and the issues better before runningI cannot afford to quit my job to run. I considered running for Assembly this cycle but because of the nature of my work it would be a conflict of interest to run and work for my org. I also then could not take time off to serve for similar reasons. We cannot afford to be a one income household. I can't afford the pay cutI could write a dissertation answering this question. But I would say there are two main reasons. First, I don't feel that the timing has been right for any particular offices to run for in my region and district. I've also been worried about the difficulties of running as a single woman who has high student loan payments and not really an amount of extra cash to spend. My ideal scenario was always to be in a position where I had a chunk of my own money to put into a campaign. Also the second problem in all honesty is my general dissatisfaction with the democatic party on a local, state and national level. I'm seriously considering running as an independent at this point in time. I didn't really know how to, or really know where to start. I do not think I could win in my predominantly White community where there is open hostility toward minorities. I don't believe I have the appropriate experience yet.  I don't feel I have the qualifications or the personal financial freedom to pursue that at this time.I don't feel that I have enough of a local network to win a local election. I've only lived in my town for 3 years.I don't feel there is a need in my area of San Francsico. There are many good candidates. If I was to move to a different part of the country and felt issues were not being tackled, I would certainly step up. It seems like it takes a huge amount of money too, which seems overwhelming.I don't have the desire to serve in public office.I don't have the means or the time to fundraise.I don't have the time and energy that it will take to do the job well. I am too busy with my job and parenting. I learned that campaigning is a full time job. I would love to run but I honestly don't know how working people and especially working parents can do it.I don't know how I'll be able to support myself financially if I'm elected.I don't like the polarized nature of the political parties in AZ.  It seems as though politics is a bloodsport here.  We need more collaboration, moderation and cooperation.  Until I feel that politicians are truly interested in doing what's best for their constituency and not what's best for themselves, I will likely avoid a run.  While I align more closely with center-left politics, our Democratic party seems way left of that.  Conversely, our Republican party is way too right of me as well.  The modest interactions I have had with the AZ Dems has been frustrating.  There seems to be a real lack of curiosity within our political party here.  Instead of asking "how can you and your skills benefit our team?" it is "have you proven that you are on-board with our team?"  The party doesn't seem open to evolving their strategy, which may be why they are struggling with the younger demographic.  Our parties feel tribal today, in an unhealthy way.  I enjoy working on campaigns, so I went through the program not because I was necessarily planning to run for office, but because I wanted to be better equip to help those campaigns (in the areas I hadn't managed before). I feel I need to live in the district I want to run for for 2-3 years before running.I feel that I'm too young to run, and that I haven't gained enough experience to run yet. I also am not in a place in my career where I could manage running and working full time, as I'm also getting my MBA. My husband is also currently running for office.I felt like the timing hasn't been right yet. I just graduated in December from UW-Madison, so I want to find where I want to make "home" before I run. I find I am most comfortable and effective working with other women candidates, training and consulting with them on their racesI had to relocat to another part of the country, and I am just getting started in making inroads in my current city.I have a 4 month old (your survey wouldn't let me write months) and a 2 year old and my husband is in school. He graduates in December. I work for the VA hospital so according to the Hatch Act I can't run and work at the VA. So we made a deal. He finishes school and takes over as primary income maker. Then I can work part time for a different hospital or clinic and then start my campaign. So it's about time and financial ability.I have a young child and am pregnant with my second child.  Between working full time and spending time with my family, I don't feel that I have time to run or serve in an elected position at this time.I have an Autistic child. That is my biggest personal obstacle. Juggling her care and her needs with my desire to become more politically active.I have other gifts to share as an educayorI haven't felt compelled to until I moved into a more challenging political environment.I haven't had the time.I just moved to my community within the past year. I have a lot of connections to make. Additionally both state legislative seats are held by democrats, so my race will be toughI like being behind the scenes, I don't have time, I don't like the exposure and ugliness of campaigns.  I live in a predominantly Republican area and would have little to no chance of winning. In my  county there are approximately 16 state representatives and none are Democrats. Aside from one mandated minority party commissioner, there are no county-wide elected Democrats either.I live in a very conservative, Republican area and I'm LGBT so it would be  almost impossible to win.I live in an area that is strongly Republican (>68%), and it would be an exercise in futility.  I live in DC right now to work in democratic politics. Perhaps will reconsider when I move back to Maine.I live in San Francisco. The office I'm interested in running for -- Board of Supervisors -- is well planned for the next 8 - 12 years. It would be beneficial for me to run for a smaller office or join a local commission first. I have not done this because I work in the South Bay (average 1.5 hour commute, or 3 hours per day) and it's not feasible to get back to the city for meetings and events at City Hall. This makes me sad. When I change jobs, I am likely to become MUCH more active in local politics again, and hopefully, run for local office.I moved out the district that I would have run in. I own a business -interestingly NOT a choice on your employment questions.  You might want to consider adding that since business owners are community leaders.  Women own businesses.  It's different than being in a leadership position. /  / My choice was based on the time commitment and the impact to not only my family but my business- which then impacts my family.   /  / I also learned through Emerge that I'm too moderate.  I'm not a party person.  I think I would be an effective legislator but I also think my own party would primary me.I prefer advising and training candidates in a consulting/chief strategist role.I ran and won my seat in 2010 and was reelected in 2014. I ran for office in 2014. It was my first time. I was not the top vote getter but received name recognition for next time. I ran for office last year. I'm not sure if I want to run again in a red county. Defeat is bad.I recently moved for work and I am not connected to the community where I live. I am also relatively young and am trying to establish myself professionally. I think I will reconsider once I am more advanced in my career. I recently returned to the state after a 5 year absence and am not invested in a particular community yet.I spent a few weeks exploring a state assembly campaign last year.  Certain local party representatives discouraged me from running.  I was told that I would intimidate other party members because I was too confident and professional.  They tried to dumb me down, offered very little practical help, and disapproved of me hiring a part-time political consultant. I withdrew my application for endorsement and have since focused my talents and energy on becoming a better trial lawyer.  I value my privacy too much.I want a work-life balance  I want to be a Queen makerI wanted to complete graduate school and am new to the area. I do not know a lot about politics or about my community. I was caring for an ill parent and I wanted my son to graduate from high school first.I was focused on finishing school while I was in the program. Now I am focused on planning my wedding and paying back my student loans. Plus I may be moving to a different state within the next two years.I was strongly considering which is why I did the Emerge program and ultimately decided that wasn't the direction I wanted to go after the program.  I was influenced early in my career by working in politics -- campaigns, government and advocacy in non-profits. I already knew intimately what it would take to run for office having grown up around politics and then working in that field.  I was also turned off by the political world seeing what it would take to move forward and how difficult it is to maintain integrity in the existing systems. Deciding to not run for office coincided with my decision to leave the public service realm years later.  My theory of change evolved since that time from looking externally at systems change to focusing on internal individual system change (as I have a private practice and teach women).  I am still involved in system change through sitting on the board of a large foundation that support economic security for women and girls.  I continue to support and empower women through public service in my work and volunteer activities.  I work as a public employee currently and am forbidden by organization policies.  / I work to get women & Democrats elected.I would not be able to run for office and continue my job, and my income is necessary to my family. However, after going through the training, I also found that I did not like the campaigning process and would most likely not want to go through it to serve. I wouldn't be able to work full time and serve in the state legislature full. I'd rather be behind the scenes right now. I just left a job working in an elected official's office and enjoy being out of that realm right now. I don't feel confident I could be a candidate, because although Emerge WI was great (and New Leaders Council-Madison which I just completed), I still don't like to be in the spotlight/public speaking. I think I could be ready in the future, though. I'm also single and feel like it would be helpful to have a greater support network when I take on the task of running.I'm currently running for County Commissioner. I hadn't run before because I was busy working, having children, taking care of my family. It wasn't until recently that I felt I was able to spend time away from that to dedicate myself to running. I'm currently trying to get over the sense that I have to "wait my turn" and buck up the courage to do it!  Also, the seat(s) that I'm interested in are already occupied by progressive Democratic women doing amazing work and I only want to step in when they're retiring or moving onto bigger & better things.I'm demoralized by politics in general, and the Democratic party in specific. I would run for local office in a nonpartisan race because I would feel like my work actually mattered.I'm interested in state office but I cannot afford the pay cut. I'm laying the groundwork.I'm not ready, I can't show social proof yet, because I'm not active in the community.I'm really focused on my job and my volunteering. I am active in climate change advocacy, too. I just don't think I would be good in an elected office.I'm single and I need to cover all of my financial obligations by myself, the state house only pays $10K annually. Also, I really love my job (I teach) and have made a commitment to my students and school. I'm working a substantial amount of hours and have found it difficult to find time to be actively involved. In a job that conflicts, and cant risk, couldnt leave this yr.  My office is up in nov & was not ready to campaign 3 months ago & too daunting to raise the $100k+ necessary, & very well lose, in a red district.Incumbent very well likedIt is a big financial and time commitment.  It's not feasible financial, would put the breaks on my career, and my area is oversaturated with great leadership. I've been building my resume while also growing my family simultaneously. I've been moving around a lot over the years. I'd like to settle in one place and become established with a few community groups first. I've just relocated (due to my job) to a new state - I need to get to know my community and constituents first. I've worked to get dozens of other people elected rather than just myself. judicial seat has not been available at the right timeLack of support. Probably too radical for some individuals view points. lack of timeLack of time - busy with my own consulting business and family (husband and young kids)Life has gotten in the way. Mostly my divorce and now the fact that I am a single mom with three kids all week. They are with their dad on the weekends in his home an hour away. As the dust has begun settling, and as kids get older and graduate high school, I'm certainly open to considering it again with in the next few years.Living in the right community; building my network; seeing role models in officeLogistical and financial reasons. My most viable opportunity would be to run in my home town.   It will require a move that will require financial resources. Misinformation and the lack of fundsMoney. Legislators in Oregon make about $25,000 per year. My husband and I rely on my income, which is over double that. Someday, we will be in a position where I will not need to work full-time and that is when I will run for office. Multiple family responsibilities stemming from tragic family death in past year.My children are my priority right now My children are young and I'm worried about the time commitment for a campaign. While we are high income earners, we have tremendous amounts of student loan debt and we can't afford it. I also currently work for the state, so there are ethical considerations as well.My current city, county, assembly and senate reps have been in office for a very long time. Running against them would be a suicide missionMy job. I cannot hold public office because I am a state government employee and the Hatch Act (at least that is what I am told by my employer). Also, legislative positions are not paid positions in my state.  I cannot afford to take a leave of absence from my work if I were to be elected. My previous job was all consuming. My State Assembly District was changed from AD32 or AD31 so the race I was considering was not available.  There was a good assemblyman in my new district who I didn't want to primary and he was doing a great job and union backed.   Need job/income stability as a single-income household.  Too time consuming to campaign and hold down separate full-time job and parent.Needed to learn more and begin to get involved New to community (just moved). More importantly, I am sole/major breadwinner for family - it would be challenging to take the time away and/or face potential loss of job security and loss of income.No open officesNo open positions. Stagnant system makes me wonder if it's worth it.No position is openNo timeNot economically feasible; no current opportunities. Not enough experience yet. I am only 24.Not enough knowledge about the process.  Uncomfortable with the exposure.  Not interested in being verbally attacked by others. Financial difficulty - can't support myself if I'm not working.Not financially stable enough to quit my job to runNot financially sustainable to leave current position for the salary offered in public office. Not ready, yet.Not sureNot the right openingNot the right opportunity.Not the right time, not financially able.Professional conflict at the current time.Raising money for a political campaign is anathema to my values leading public education.  All fundraising I do will be for the public school I run that will benefit the Title 1 schools I lead.  I will never spend my time raising tens of thousands or millions to run a political campaign when all that  money needs to go to educating our children.  Campaign finance is immoral-- at best.  It is unethical and disgusting to me.shame still working, too expensive, past the age when it makes senseStrong incumbents in all of the seats I would run for.The age of my children and my youngest has special needs. I am also a single mother on a very limited income.The election I plan to run for does not occur until 2018The huge time committment required to raise money, campaign, and hold office is not compatible with the time needed to be available to my small children.The main reason I decided not to run when I was exploring the possibility of a candidacy was due to the personal/financial economic viability of the decision for myself and my partner at the time. I am still considering running but my financial foundation needs to be in place before I make such a time consuming commitment.The next cycle hasn't started already and I am still building up my kitchen cabinetThe next municipal election isn't until 2018.The office has not become available and I am undecided if I'd like to run or maintain as a political influencer.The pay, local legislators make pocket change. / I like working behind the scenes in state government, I'm able to navigate change by working with /for those elected. / I think running would take me away from my family even more then I already am for work.The right seat hasn't been open and/or it hasn't been the right time (moved, illness, etc.).The timing for me personally, as well as my family has not yet been right. There's an established political system that you have to be a part of.  I'm in a large urban area, one of the major blocks.  I have not solidified my role with the established party leaders.Through Emerge I discovered the requirement for fundraising and self-promotion which is something I would find difficult to do. timeTime and basic needs: I must do FT work to have Health Insurance and everyday basic living expenses such as: gas, food...  The position that I want to run in my town (city council) is part time with no benefits: no health care, no pay, while the work requires FT in order to do a good -meaningful-job.   /  / My current job takes up most of my time, running for office means weighing in/considering  between personal sacrifices and ..more personal sacrifices...Although I am trying to find the way to manage my time and am leaning toward running for office some day when I have some financial security.Time commitment to campaign is far too much for what I'm willing to give at the present time. There are a number of unfair practices going on within the electoral process--not sure I care to be a part of any of it at this point. Time constraints time constraints; work/political office balancetime, work, family, money, didn't think i could/would winTime. Time. I am working on a doctorate degree. And I am not ready to be in the public eye give the age of my children. TimingTiming not right with my career development/demands. Moved for work a few times, so was not settled into a location. Politics has also gotten very negative over the past few years, which is a bit of a deterrent. Timing. My plan was to run for city council, the incumbent for my district had just been reelected so I needed to wait for the term to be up. Shortly after we moved to another state. I am still getting to know the political environment of my new state.Too busy teaching.Too busy with work and children, lack of women in leadership who have similar commitments, limited financial means - mostly, lack of confidenceToo busy working on causes/for candidates that I care about to run for myselfToo expensive, and I do not want my personal life scrutinized that way.Too hard to do it while working full time and raising three kidsUnable to take time off of work and I need an income.Unexpected relocation to Canada for spouse and special needs child (2 adopted from Ethiopia)Waiting for incumbent to finish term.Waiting for the next election cycle. Waiting for the right time/district to open up Waiting until my daughter is older and I have more time. Working full time does not allow for me to run for the office I would like..State Rep, but am now considering school board or city council to better fit with my work lifeWorking mom with two small children. Also the political climate is fraught with vitriol and personal scrutiny, and I don't prefer to engage that way, put my energy into it, nor subject myself to it.Young child, can't afford to take time off work